---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 11 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 11

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 11 of 15
**Words**: ~7,391
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

The magnetic needle seems to desire to dive vertically into the sea. This appears to be the opposite effect from that cited in the magnet bar and compass experiment. The north attractive positive pole of the planet appears to attract the north attractive positive pole of the compass, and the south repellent negative pole of the planet appears to attract the north attractive positive pole of the compass. The explanation lies in the fact that the one north direction of attraction in the bar of iron and compass is continuous, while the two north directions of attraction in the planet are opposed. They meet at the center of the earth at the apices of two opposing cones. The magnetic bases of these two cones are respectively in the arctic and antarctic regions. As mass generates the magnetic bases disappear…………. Unreadable line….. The diameters of the bases extend from the known major charging poles through the poles of rotation to the unknown minor charging poles situated at equal distances on the opposite sides of the poles of rotation. It has previously been explained that the north of any mass is its gravitative center. The direction of north is along the electric axes of the contracting cones of generation from their bases to their apices. North is always in the direction of genero-activity, high pressure and high potential. In any mass, north is the gravitative-radiative center where the apparent ability to attract and to repel is at its maximum. On the contrary, south is always in the direction of radio-activity, low pressure and low potential. South is an extension of the equatorial plane which divides any mass. It is that part of mass where radiative emanations are at their maximum. It is the plane of disappearance of the contours of the expanding cones of radiation. Page 216 Page 217 It must continually be borne in mind that electricity contracts and attracts from within, and that magnetism expands and repels also from within. Consider the isoclinal lines which girdle this planet approximately parallel to its equator, according to very careful surveys for terrestrial magnetic charts, at every ten degrees of latitude between the equator and the poles. If that portion of the planet between any of these isoclinal lines and either of the poles were lifted out, one would be looking into one of the gripping cone clutches of the universal machine, or one of the slipping disc clutches, the apex of which reaches somewhere near the equatorial plane of the planet. The contour of the cone thus exposed would give the direction of the magnetic lines of force which emanate from the planet and seek their regeneration at the pole of the ….. hemisphere from which they emanate. This same effect of magnetic lines of force may be produced by the well known experiment of causing iron filings to find magnetic lines of force by placing them on a piece of paper which is vibrated rapidly over a "magnetic" bar of iron. Some will always follow the direction of the outward flowing magnetic stream, and some will find the direction of the inward flowing electro-regenerative stream. The current within a bar of iron flowing from south to north is an electric flow and the current is an induced current. The discharged current which flows outside the bar of iron is a magnetic flow which is conducted by the more expanded surrounding medium to a lower potential, or is deflected and regenerated by the resistance of the surrounding connecting medium. When so deflected, it is again attracted to the south pole of the bar of iron, where it re-enters as an electric flow. Science describes this effect as magnetic induction. Magnetic induction is impossible. Induction is an evidence of regeneration through sufficient resistance to degenerative conduction. Induction is an effect of generation or regeneration. Induction is centripetal. Its flow is northerly. Conduction is an effect of degeneration. Conduction is centrifugal. Its direction is southerly. If this is true, then induction must be related to the attraction of gravitation and conduction to the repulsion of radiation. If it is true that these are so related, it must necessarily follow that a strong inductive effect is always simultaneously accompanied by a strong conductive effect. If this latter is true it must necessarily follow that increasing induction, which means increasing positive charge, must be accompanied by an increasing power to attract. It must also be accompanied by an increasing negative discharge and an increasing power to repel. It is easy to test these statements by applying them to any known inductive and conductive effects. Consider the storage battery, for example. Increase its charge and its discharge also increases. Electric bulbs connected with its conductive outlet will brighten. Consider the sun. Its ability to radiate and to repel is great because of its great ability to generate and to attract. Consider each planet in the order of its potential position in its system. Page 218 Page 219 Page 220 The ability of each to discharge and to repel lessens with the lowering of its potential position in its system. Just so with all mass. As its potential is lowered, which means that its polar magnetic bases are enlarged, and its ecliptic expansion is increased, its ability to generate, charge, attract, radiate, discharge and repel is also increased. When a bar of iron is "magnetized" it is in reality electrified. The magnetic bases of the iron atoms have been contracted. Let us now imagine the charging poles of this planet as two immense bar "magnets" turned positive end to positive end, and placed so that they meet at its gravitative-radiative, attractive-repellent, charging-discharging, genero-radiative center. Let us see what is the potential position of the earth and what relation the positions of its so-called "magnetic" poles and the expansion of the Cancer-Capricorn belt have to its ability to charge, attract, discharge and repel. Let us see why its orbit is inclined over 7° to the solar equator and why the space allotted to it is defined as a distance of 92,900,000 miles, beyond which it cannot go without increasing its polar bases and ecliptic expansions and within which it cannot trespass without decreasing them. Up above Hudson Bay, on this planet, is a shifting point known as the "north magnetic pole." This is the planet's point of maximum electric charge. This, and a corresponding shifting point near the south pole, are the two points of maximum generation. At these two points of our nameless planet the universal force connects its charging wires to this storage battery which we call the earth. These points shall therefore be termed the "charging poles." The charging poles are practically 20° away from the pole of rotation. A circle drawn through them would define the polar magnetic base of this planet. North of the. equator, 23°27' 08", is a line indicating the northerly limit of the intersection of this planet's ecliptic plane with itself. South of the equator, at the same distance, is the southerly limit of intersection. If the planet were a perfectly true sphere, the charging poles and the axis of rotation would coincide. There would be no magnetic base. There would also be no Cancer-Capricorn belt, for the plane of the ecliptic and of the equator would coincide. Furthermore, the plane of the earth's ecliptic and its equator would coincide with the plane of the solar equator. This planet's ecliptic is inclined over 7° to the plane of the solar equator and its equator is inclined 23° 27' 08" to the plane of its ecliptic. This results in a very low potential as compared to Mercury or to Venus and a high one in respect to the outer planets. It also results in a low freezing point and a rigidity that would be impossible in a position ten million miles nearer to the sun or in a plane 2° nearer to that of the solar equator. The potential position of this planet necessitates a small percentage of oblateness, or flattening of the poles. Page 221 Page 222 The oblateness of the planet accounts for the difference of about 3° in the extension of the polar magnetic bases and the ecliptic expansion. To flatness at the poles is ascribed 1 1-2° and to the bulging at the equator is ascribed the other 1 1-2.° As a planet finds a lower potential position for its relative mass its oblateness increases, and so also do the polar magnetic bases and Cancer-Capricorn belts move their positions toward each other. As Cancer-Capricorn belts and polar magnetic bases expand, the power of the mass to attract and to repel lessens. Oblateness also increases as centrifugal force causes its equator to bulge suggestive of the beginning of the return journey from mass to plane. In any mass the area of its ecliptic expansion, the areas of its „polar magnetic bases, and the positions of its charging poles are governed by the oblateness of the mass. In any mass as oblateness decreases, polar magnetic bases and ecliptic expansion decrease their areas, and charging poles draw closer to its pole of rotation. If the position of the charging electric poles and the Cancer-Capricorn belt in mass conditions the ability of mass to attract and to repel, and these positions are governed by the potential position of the mass itself, it must necessarily follow that the pressures which determine that potential position must be related to gravitation and radiation. Page 223 Page 224 CONTENTS CHAPTER XVI EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION THE WAVE To know the wave is to know the secret of creation. The wave is nature's method of transferring the dimensionless concept of form in inertia to di- mensional form in mass in motion by an impact of the energy of the concept against the inertial plane. All waves are the expression of force, a record of the universal constant or its multiples in accumulated energy. The dimensions of any wave are the dimensions of the multiples, in universal ratios, of the energy constant represented by that wave. Waves are not undulations such as those produced by the shaking of a rope up and down. They are actions and reactions beginning at and growing from harmonic points of impact upon the inertial plane of the wave. Nor are waves continuations of motion beginning at one source and transferred in sequence. Waves are simultaneously generated from inertia at intervals which are sequential, and in dimensions which are opposed and sequential. Sequential intervals of the expression of force in motion are simultaneously recorded on the inertial planes of equilibrium of each consecutive octave of motion. Within each consecutive octave every expression of motion is sequentially produced and reproduced in every atom of every element until it is finally recorded in the inertial planes. All of the energy of the universal constant is existent in inertia and all of its variations in accumulation are stored in the sequential inertial planes of equilibrium which have their chemical representation in the inert gases, from which they borrow their appearance of existence of mass in motion. The inert gases are the storehouses of all of the states of motion contained within the mass of the wave. The purpose of the wave is to transfer states of motion from one potential to another. This is nature's method of accumulating the energy constant from low potential to high potential, octave by octave, in a series of progressive steps until maximum motion has been reached. Every state of motion is the result of a concept of that state. The purpose of motion is to contract concept into form and then to expand it into the memory of form. All concepts are but recollections of eternal ideas. All forms are but the regenerated memories of universal Mind. Each action of motion is recorded by a reaction in the master-tone inert gas of each octave. Any expression of motion whether of gravitation or radiation, or whether the tossing of a marble or the revolving of a planet, is simultaneously recorded by impact against the inertial plane of every octave of recorded motion in the universe of dimension, and from there produced and reproduced sequentially in waves of mass in motion. Page 225 The sequences of a wave are tonal and its tonal intervals have an appearance of existence in masses of relative dimensions. Let us repeat the definition of a wave: "The wave is nature's method of transferring the dimensionless concept of form in inertia to dimensional form in mass in motion by an impact of the energy of the concept against the inertial plane." All motion appears in mass and disappears in plane. This is the process of evolution and devolution in its utmost simplicity. The appearance of motion in mass is by way of the positive tones of the wave and its disappearance into plane is by way of the negative tones of the wave. An impact of a stone upon the surface of the water transfers both its positive, gravitative actions and its negative, radiative reactions simultaneously upon the entire surface of the water. Near the point of impact small harmonic circles become the contracted bases of opposing cones of high altitudes. Near the point of impact short high waves of power-time dimension simultaneously pile themselves up in sequential stages. Ten miles or a thousand miles away harmonic circles of increasingly larger bases, which become the expanded bases of cones of low altitudes, are simultaneously marked off on the inertial plane of the water's surface. These are the expanding radiative cones of lessening generative energy which are dissipating the energy of the impact into its equivalent in speed. These opposing forces simultaneously proceed in opposite directions from the harmonic reproductions of the impact on the water's surface. The generative cones are ever seeking contracted gravitational centers to continue their appearance as form, and the radiative cones are ever seeking the expansion of equilibrium in inertia to dissipate their appearance as form, into plane from which all form is evolved. Each wave is, therefore, built up simultaneously in sequential stages in sequential preponderance of opposite dimensions. Waves are not those parts which are either wholly above or wholly below their axes. One wave of any dimension is that portion of the sequence which is bounded by the turning point of one crest and the next trough. The inertial plane of the wave coincides with the line of axis of the wave. A wave begins at the inertial plane and extends in both directions from the inertial plane to its repeative point at trough and crest. The popular concept that light travels along undulating waves is not in conformity with the laws of motion. Waves are constructed in sequential stages until they meet at their overtone positions in trough and crest. No state of motion travels beyond the boundaries of its own wave mass. It is reproduced by union with its opposite effect at every inertial plane which divides masses in motion in the universe of dimension. Neither is the wave in one plane. The wave is a spiral. The wave is not simply a curved line. The line of the wave is the moving vortex line of the maximum high pressure of the opposed cones of the wave. The axis of the wave is in the inertial plane of birth of the wave. A wave is not a single unit. It is a series of two opposed units. Page 226 Page 227 A wave is not simply a line. A wave is mass in opposition. The wave is a series of two opposed volumes, the forms of which are cones. The moving line of the wave is a spiral record of the variable instability of motion. The wave is too complex a subject to more than touch upon in this volume. In the second volume it will be charted in all of its complexities while considering the structure of the atom. A study of the various wave charts will assist in visualizing the structure of the wave and its changing planes. A mass is an effect of resistance to the formation of wave series. A mass is a simultaneously evolving and devolving harmonic sphere in volume transformed by motion from harmonic circles in plane. All mass of perfectly balanced motion is spherical. A true sphere is only possible at the exact point of north at the overtone of the wave. The evolution of mass from plane to sphere and its diffusion back to plane are by the way of the cone. The sphere is the perfection of form, and the perfection of the illusion of stability in motion. All generating mass is aiming for spherical perfection of form by means of gyroscopic perfection of motion. The dimensions of a mass are the dimensions of the resistance exerted against the formation of the wave. The resistance to the formation of the wave is greatest at the apex of the cone and least at its inertial base. Therefore, the power dimensions of mass are increasingly great along the pressure line toward north of the wave, and maximum in its ultimate north. The high pressure line of the wave is at the electric pole of all mass just as the low pressure plane is at the equator. The bases of the isoclinal cones mark varying stages of increased pressure as they near the poles and depart from the equator. Harmonic spheres are formed in the vortices of the contracted north from the expanded nebulae of the south. Therefore, north is the direction of that attribute of motion which is termed the attraction of gravitation, and south is the direction of the repulsion of radiation. The duration of the wave is the interval during which motion can be continued in the wave. No matter whether the duration of a wave is one ten-thousandth of a second or ten thousand billion years, every stage of its evolution is exactly the same. Its volume must be transferred to mass in whirling spheres which, in turn, are dissipated into plane. Motion diffuses away from the north line of the wave toward the south plane of inertia. Harmonic spheres expand from the north of their contracted forms to the south harmonic circles of their expanded concept. All expression of energy is a concentration into harmonic spheres in motion of expanded concept in inertial plane. Form disappears into south by diffusion from north. Therefore south is the direction of that attribute of motion which is termed the repulsion of radiation. North is the direction of electro-positive charge. Therefore positive charge attracts. South is the direction of electro-negative discharge. Therefore negative discharge repels. Page 228 Page 229 If these statements are true then positive charge cannot possibly attract negative discharge. North is the direction of the generative action of displacement. South is the direction of the radiative reaction of replacement. It will be recalled that the concept and expression of all energy is simultaneously universal and its preponderance of opposition is sequential. Waves are the expression in motion of the concept of energy. Energy expresses itself by an apparent division of its force into equal opposites of more and less. Therefore, each wave is divided into opposites. Also the entire sequence of waves of any expression of energy is divided into equal opposites of changing dimensions of an unchanging constant. In order to comprehend more fully the spiral construction of *a wave, it would be well to imagine the universe of dimension within which all energy is expressed as being divided into a series of cubes. We will call these the cubes of motion. Sub-divide each of these cubes by three median planes, each one of which is parallel to two of its six faces. We will call these the planes of inertia. Let us call the horizontal one of these three planes the south inertial plane of concept. The visible vertical plane will be called the prime vertical and the receding plane the secondary vertical. It will be observed that these three planes sub-divide the cube into eight cubic compartments of equal dimensions. Let us bear in mind that the cubes of motion are each sub-divided into eight cubic compartments of equal dimensions the inner faces of which constitute the three inertial planes. ; Of these eight cubes, the left four are the cubes of positive force and electric domination, while the right four are the cubes of negative force and magnetic domination. For purposes of convenience, these cubes of motion will be numbered in accordance with the diagram on page 155 as 1 +, 2 +, 3 +, 4+ and 5—, 6 — , 7— and 8 — . The point of intersection of the three inertial planes at the center of each cube of motion is the point of beginning of the line of the wave. From this point, the line of the wave extends spirally in both directions to the corners of the cube. Let us call the spiral line of the wave the electric pole of the wave. Let us call the vertical line of intersection of the three inertial planes the electric pole of concept. Let us call the corners of the cube the north points, or overtones of the wave. From the harmonic circles of the horizontal planes the contour of the opposing cones which bound the mass of the wave is developed. We have now left unnamed and undisposed of the six outer faces of the cube, or twenty-four faces of the sub-divided cube. We shall call the two vertical faces which parallel the primary vertical inertial plane the ecliptics of the wave, the two faces which parallel the secondary vertical plane the east-west planes, and the two horizontal faces the north opposed planes. All motion begins on the south inertial plane as more fully described in the preceding and following chapters and expresses itself in motion by expansion in both directions from the south inertial plane toward contraction at two points in the diagonal north corners of the cube. Page 230 By a study of the chart on page 155 it will be observed that the horizontal and the secondary inertial planes divide positive charge from negative discharge. These planes divide the opposing tone series of each wave. The primary vertical plane, however, divides the entire wave progression from another wave progression. It divides the positive series from the positive, and the negative series from the negative. Every wave of energy of any kind or of any dimension is recorded in series of opposing tones. Tones are storm centers formed by resistance to the electric action which constitutes the be ginning of motion. Tonal vortices are the centers of revolving and rotating masses which build equal and opposite tonal pressure walls within the opposed tonal wave of energy to stabilize the motion within the compartments thus divided. Tonal pressure walls are contractions of the south inertial planes toward the ecliptic of the wave. Tonal pressure walls are the ecliptic planes of their systems. Tonal pressure walls are reflected in every mass in every element to measure the potential of that mass in reference to its system, just as the tonal pressure wall of an entire system measures the potential and defines the potential position of that system in its wave. The principal tonal pressure walls by means of which the potential position of a mass can be measured are the more or less expanded Cancer-Capricorn belts which define the limitations of its equatorial precessional orbits, and the polar magnetic bases limited by their charging poles, which define the polar precessional orbits. By these two pressure walls any mass can be most accurately measured and many otherwise unanswerable questions can by this means be answered. The position of the polar magnetic base of any mass can be calculated with precision with the knowledge of its equatorial inclination to its own orbit and its oblateness. Both of these positions can be calculated in any mass by finding its true potential position in its system and applying the laws of universal ratios to that position in comparison with the standard units of any other known position. The tonal pressure walls erected within the opposing cones are those various states of motion which we call the elements of matter. Tonal pressure walls are erected in orderly mathematical relations and divide the energy of each wave into equal parts of the same constant. Mid-tonal pressure walls are erected between tonal pressure walls, and their total dimensions equal the constant of a whole tone. It will now be well to consider the process of overcoming inertia by force which gives us the various states of motion of the One substance. Page 231 CONTENTS CHAPTER XVII EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION TIME-THE FOURTH DIMENSION Time is the measure of universal repeativeness. All phenomena of nature are repeative. All repetition is sequential. Time is the interval between the sequences of events. Were there no events, time would not be. If nothing "happened" in the universe, there would be no intervals. Intervals of time are illusions which give birth to other illusions known as relations. Without intervals of time, relations would not be. Without relations, dimensions would not be. All dimensions are relative. Time is a dimension. Time is therefore relative. Time dimension marks the periodicities of all phenomena of motion. Time belongs essentially to motion, and is not an attribute of substance. In inertia time, like all other dimensions, does not exist. In opposition, time appears to exist. In opposition, there are apparent intervals which create that illusion of motion which we call speed. Speed is the time consumed in relation to the distance covered. In the highest perceptible octave, the speed of reproduction of the accumulated universal constant is 186,330 miles per second. This speed of 186,330 miles is the speed with which energy overcomes inertia and sets it in motion in the highest octave of the lowest potential of matter perceptible on this planet. This is the speed of reproduction of all pressures in the fourth octave only. Higher octaves have increasingly greater speeds. As energy accumulates the universal constant into multiples, the intervals of production and reproduction are lengthened in universal ratio to correspond with those multiples. Each succeeding octave has its own time limit for reproducing the image of concept. Each wave of accumulating energy consumes more time but the constant is not changed. The intervals of electric accumulation gradually lengthen and their speeds of reproduction correspondingly lengthen. Intervals lengthen in proportion to energy accumulation. The greater the complexity of any state of motion, the greater the interval of reproduction of that state of motion. The wave of great energy of which our solar system is a part consumes countless billions of years in completing its intervals and in reproducing itself, while a wave of low potential within it consumes but an incalculably small fraction of time. If the constants of all the waves of low potential that appeared and disappeared ,in one hour were calculated, the total would' be exactly the same as the constant of one wave of one hour's duration. Page 232 Within each consecutive octave, the speed of the previous octave is accumulated in the universal ratio into multiples of that speed. As each octave wave of energy is but a variation of the dimension of the universal constant and the multiples of the universal constant are repeated within each larger wave, so are the various speeds repeated within each wave. The reproductive speed of genero-active light decreases in lowering octaves in inverse universal ratio, and radio-active speed increases in lowering octaves in direct ratio. The lower the potential, the greater the speed of reproduction. Every effect of motion in any octave is repeated in sequence in the various speeds of every other octave. Every effect of motion is cumulative and repeative within its accumulation. For clarifying the meaning of these laws, one needs no better example than the sound of the human voice reproducing itself in the fifth octave, the "air." Through the air sound reproduces slowly, but the expanded sound reproduces at the various speeds of each consecutive octave both lower and higher, through which it passes. The sound of the human voice very slowly reproduces itself against the cliff side a mile away on the other side of the valley and returns as an echo. The expanded sound of the voice in the highest octave, however, will girdle the globe many times before the last echo has returned from across the valley. The sound of a pistol shot may be heard and reproduced by radio a thousand miles away from the scene of the action before the sound can be heard a half mile from the place of the action. That illusion of motion which gives us the idea that light travels at various speeds is due to the greater and less intervals which greater and less potentials require to overcome inertia. The concept of energy of low potential overcomes the inertia of a lower potential position more easily and more quickly than the energy of high potential overcomes the inertia of a relatively lower potential. The equilibrium pressure walls of high potential positions require relatively greater intervals of time to overcome their inertia. In a universe of equilibrium this is necessary, otherwise the universal constant would be upset. Light appears to travel and this illusion of motion gives us the universal yard stick known as the "speed of light." The "speed of light" of the fourth octave is the expression of desire of electricity for action. The "speed of light" is the universal genero-active speed of the highest octave of lowest perceptible potential. One of the outstanding characteristics of opposed forces is the ultimate ability possessed by each to conquer the other. Each accomplishes this by assuming the preponderance of the other through a simulation of its attributes. It is a conspicuous fact that the universal, relatively slow, genero-active speed which resistance has decelerated to 186,330 miles per second at the fourth octave of its journey from plane toward mass, is gradually appropriated by magnetism and applied to the radio-active speed from mass toward plane. The speed of perceptible radio-active helium ejections from radium (1002 +) exactly equals the genero-active absorptions of ethlogen (402 +). From actinium (1003 +) on the ejection speed increases until, in tomium (1004+ ) it is exactly + 186,330 miles per second. Page 233 As genero-active force decelerates its power-time because of the work performed in mass accumulation, radio-active force accelerates its speed-time to balance by dissipation. Reactions must keep pace with actions. All down the octaves the battle between the two opposite forces continues, electricity ever losing speed as it works to gain power, and magnetism ever absorbing the lost speed for the very purpose of dissipating the accumulated power by increasingly forceful explosive ejections. In accumulated mass, when the tenth octave is reached, magnetism has developed a power to repel radio-active emanations from mass toward plane at the universal speed of 186,330 miles per second. When radioactive emanations from mass reach the universal speed equalling the speed of perceptible light, mass has reached the limit of its ability to accumulate opposing pressures into high potential. The universal radio-active speed of high potential is the ending of the cyclic exhalation, just as the universal genero-active "speed of light" is the beginning of the cyclic inhalation. Thus, during the entire battle between the two opposing forces, the universal equilibrium between the opposing power and speed pressures is preserved down through the octaves from inertia to inertia. It is because of the continuous battle between the two opposing forces that mass is constantly changing its potential. Because of this fact, it is also constantly out of place in respect to the potential position of the next moment. In moving from the potential position of this moment to that of the next moment mass is condemned to walk the treadmill of perpetual motion. All potential out of place must be simultaneously balanced throughout the universe by a repetition of displacement in each changing dimension, and a replacement in an exactly opposed dimension. Displacement and replacement are universally simultaneous. An action calculated to displace is simultaneously accompanied by a reaction to replace. All gravitational and radiational expressions are simultaneous in their opposition. The universal see-saw must go down in unison with its going up. Action and reaction are not sequential events. They are simultaneous oscillations, but the repetition of the actions and reactions are events separated by sequential intervals. All effects of motion are simultaneously opposed, but their repeative acts are sequential. That which man calls "energy" is the displacement of stability and its sequential replacement. That which man calls "potential energy" is a locked state of energy displacement balanced by its equal replacement. That which man calls "kinetic energy" is the ability of the opposing forces to perform "work" during the sequential intervals between displacement and replacement. That which man calls "sex" is the degree of displacement, which is male, or replacement, which is female. That which man calls "voltage" is the increasing displacement. It is heading northeasterly, against resistance, in the centripetal direction of all charging systems. That which man calls "amperage" is the increasing replacement. It is heading southwesterly, with assistance, in the centrifugal direction of all discharging systems. Force is continuous. It is not sequential. It does not consume time. It is universal. It is life. Consider, for example, the attraction of gravitation as force. The attraction of one mass for another does not consume time. Force is continuous. The expression of the force of gravitation in drawing two masses together, however, does consume time. Page 234 Page 235 An apparent variation of the force through accumulation or release of potential constitutes an event which is reproduced in sequence from the inertial planes which separate all masses. The force of the universal constant must not be confused with its opposite expressions. One is unchanging and dimensionless. The other is constantly changing and has varying and opposite dimensions. In motion, force has the illusion of existence. In inertia force exists as a potentiality without the illusion of motion. When an event takes place "anywhere" in the universe the concept of that event is simultaneously measured in inertia "throughout" the universe of non-dimension. This is the first step toward the production and the reproduction of an event. The second step is the sequential and universal reproduction of the concept of that event in plus and equal minus potential. Simultaneity is essential to the maintenance of an equilibrium. The dimensionless universe of inertia, the apparently "nothing," has taken on the dimensions of the apparently "something." The illusion of space, time and motion has appeared. Duration has also appeared. Like all effects and dimensions of motion, time has its opposite expressions, both in effects and dimensions. The opposites of time are power-time and speed-time. Power-time is genero-active and therefore accumulative. It belongs to electricity. It begins with incredible speed of rotation and no speed of revolution and ends with no speed of either opposite pressure. The effect is rigidity. Speed-time is radio-active and therefore dissipative. It belongs to magnetism. It begins with incredible speed of revolution and no speed of rotation and ends with no speed of either opposite pressure. Its effect is tenuity. The greater the accumulation of electric energy and the slower the generative speed, the greater the speed-time of radio-active emanations from that accumulation. The greater the attraction of cohesion in stored energy of the high potential of rigid bodies, the greater the deceleration. That which man calls "mass" is changing potential out of place constantly seeking place because of its changing potential. By "place" we mean equilibrium. The constant search for an equilibrium position by all mass is the reason for its constant motion. Accumulation of displaced energy from low equilibrium pressure walls to high equilibrium pressure walls, its storage as potential in various compartments bounded by those pressure walls, its redistribution into place by discharge and its reproduction throughout the universe, are sequential events in time dimension. Time in intervals of seconds, minutes, hours, days, months, centuries, periods or cycles is a dimension measuring the sequential displacement and replacement of potential, accumulated from inertia and redistributed into inertia. The intervals of time on this planet are standard units born of this planet's potential which alone determines those intervals. As the potential changes the standard units must change. Page 236 The long year of our planet's low potential position in motion grew out of the shorter one of the high potential position held at birth, because of the deceleration of its revolution. Our short day similarly appeared because of the acceleration of rotation as the planet's potential was lowered by increased distance from the sun. Our year is now lengthening. It is continually expanding toward disappearance with the deceleration of our revolution, and our day with all of its sub-divisions is gradually shortening. It is continually contracting toward disappearance with the acceleration of our rotation. The power-time dimension of each mass of a system expresses itself by deceleration of rotation speed-time which, thus retarded, expresses its equal and opposite reaction in accelerated revolution. They exchange attributes. Power is accumulated from time by the resistance of revolution to the speed of rotation by the application of its power brake to the fast rotating wheels at the cost of losing its own power and absorbing the lowered speed. This process lengthens days and shortens years. It is a charging effect. It transforms time into power by storing energy into mass, the universal storage battery. Just as mass contracts itself into appearance, so does it expand itself into disappearance. Just as the time intervals of this process contract, so do they necessarily expand. Potential appears because of preponderant charge. Potential disappears because of preponderant discharge. Jupiter's year is nearly twelve of our years, and its day less than one-half of our day. It is expanding its years into disappearance by decelerating its revolution and is contracting its days into disappearance by accelerating its rotation. Contracting, generating bodies decelerate the speed of rotation of inner planets by proximity. The closer the planets of a system, the more the relative speed of rotation of inner planets is retarded by proximity. Each acts as a brake upon the wheels Of the other until they gradually meld in rigidity. In melded rigid bodies the speed of rotation of inner parts is less than that of outer parts. Deceleration of rotation of the planets of a system increases the surface tension pressure of a system. If this law is well founded, then deceleration of speed of rotation must be related to the attraction of gravitation. Increase of surface tension pressure is nature's process of effecting cohesion through composition. The greater the deceleration of rotation, the greater the centripetal force of contraction pressure. Expanding, emanated bodies separate because of their accelerated rotation. The farther apart the planets of a system, the more their speed is accelerated by the release of the brakes upon the wheels of each. Acceleration of rotation of the planets of a system decreases the surface tension pressure Of a System. If this law is well founded, then acceleration of speed of rotation must be related to the repulsion of radiation. Decrease of surface tension pressure by acceleration is nature's process of distributing assembled substances through decomposition. Our standard units of time, or of any other dimensions are not a proper basis for calculation of the dimensions of any other potential. Page 237 Relative time dimensions of different planets are very easy to determine however, and through them, with such other relative dimensions which we can as easily determine, such as distance, relative areas, intervals of revolution and rotation, of plane and other comparative dimensions, it is possible for us to compute those relative dimensions which we cannot otherwise determine such as density, temperature and pressures. We measure the mass and density of the sun and planets of our systems by our own standard units of gravitational intensity just as we do their time dimensions. We arrive at wrong conclusions because our premises are wrong. Though it has been calculated to be only twenty-five per cent as dense, the sun is, in reality, inconceivably more dense than this planet. The sun's mass is vastly more than 332,000 times that of the earth. Mercury is very much more than 1.21 of the earth's mass, and Jupiter is not 317 times the mass of the earth, as calculated. As a matter of fact Jupiter's huge volume is approximately only eight times the volume that our earth will be when in Jupiter's potential position. Jupiter is, roughly, only double the mass of the earth, and Mercury's mass actually exceeds that of the earth. When our planet has reached Jupiter's potential position its diameter will be approximately 40,000 miles, which is nearly equal to the radius of Jupiter. Doubling the radius is equivalent to cubing the volume in direct ratio according to the universal law respecting all expansion pressure dimensions. Consider the opposite effect. When our planet was in Mercury's potential position its diameter was approximately 2,500 miles, or less than that of Mercury. A time interval of a planet of an atomic system is as relatively long as the same time interval of the planet of a solar system. More than that, every planet of every atom has its own relative standard units of dimension which are as appropriate to it as are those of any planet of our solar system. With the appearance of the intervals of duration comes the appearance of variation of the more and less of duration which we call faster and slower, or acceleration and deceleration. Appearance of variation is as characteristic of time as of any other effect of gravitation and radiation. There is but one "speed" by which all motion is measurable, the speed of the universal constant. Less speed is but an accumulation of the speed-time constant transformed into power. More speed is but a release of that accumulation. Deceleration is but a contraction of time, and acceleration its expansion. All dimensions are relative and the ratios of all dimensions are universal. If time is the interval between events, and events are effects of motion, time must therefore be as relative as the standard units of the events it records. Time on this planet is merely a relative dimension which measures intervals in the sequential expression of motion which belong to this planet. Time must expand and contract in the universal ratios common to all dimensions of motion when applied to planets in other potential positions. Minutes must shorten as expanding mass rotates faster, and lengthen with contracting mass. Years must balance by lengthening as expanding mass revolves more slowly, and shorten as revolution increases. Page 238 A year is one periodic revolution of a mass around its sun. A day is one periodic rotation. All planets vary in both of these periods in opposite directions of the universal ratios and this variation of time is characteristic of all opposites of dimension in all mass. The opposites of all effects of motion vary in the opposites of their several dimensions in the direct and the inverse of the universal ratios. If these premises are right, then time dimension must be taken into account in the writing of the law of gravitation and radiation. If variation of time dimension of a mass changes the ability of the mass to appear to attract or repel, then the law which takes into consideration but two of the dimensions of the mass, ignoring all others, cannot be complete. Time and power appear by lengthening the day and shortening the year, and disappear by reversing these effects. ____________________ Page 239 CONTENTS CHAPTER XVIII EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION TEMPERATURE-THE EIGHTH DIMENSION This universe of more or less is a universe of varying pressures. Temperature is a dimension of relative and opposing pressures as expressed in its opposites, heat and cold. The popular concept that temperature measures only the degree of heat is not in conformity with the laws of motion. Heat is improperly presumed to be an effect of motion which is operative in both directions.
