---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 9 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 9

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 9 of 15
**Words**: ~7,399
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

Mass of less volume is contracted mass, and similar mass of greater volume is expanded mass. Contracting mass draws away from similar, expanding mass in the opposite direction, forming an eccentric orbit of revolution around the nucleal center of its system. The orbit of any contracting mass is ever drawing closer to the nucleal center of its system in closing spiral lines. All mass with a decreasing orbit is ever accelerating its speed of revolution in that orbit. All of the conditions precedent to the appearance of increasing ability of mass to attract and to repel have eight conspicuous effects in common. These are increasing centripetal preponderance, pressure, temperature, speed of revolution and positive charge, and decreasing volume, area of orbit and speed of rotation. On the contrary, all of the conditions precedent to the appearance of decreasing ability of mass to attract and to repel have the eight opposite effects in common. These are decreasing centrifugal preponderance, pressure, temperature, speed of revolution and negative discharge, and increasing volume, area of orbit and speed of rotation. In any mass the greater its speed of revolution, the greater its power to attract and to repel. In any mass the greater its speed of rotation, the less its power to attract and to repel. As all mass is constantly changing both of these dimensions, all mass is varying in its ability to attract and to repel. Revolution is the opposite of rotation. One exactly balances the other in accordance with the law that there can be no increase or decrease in any effect of motion without a balancing decrease or increase in its opposite effect. Also, one eventually overtakes the other, in accordance with the universal law of sequential preponderance in all opposite effects of motion. Revolution is an effect of motion employed by electricity to increase surface tension pressure in order that it may accomplish its desire of converting the universe into solids. Electricity conquers magnetism in its sequentially preponderant power of generation and regeneration. Page 175 Rotation is an effect of motion employed by magnetism to counteract the desire of electricity by dissociating that which electricity has associated. Magnetism conquers electricity in its sequentially preponderant power of degenerating that which electricity has generated. All mass is simultaneously electric and magnetic, but preponderantly one or the other cumulatively in endless repeative sequence. All mass simultaneously revolves and rotates though one effect is always preponderant while the other one is preparing for its right of preponderance. All opposite effects of motion are simultaneous in the expression of their sex opposition but pre- ponderant in sequence in each sex expression. Each oscillation of the opposing electric and magnetic forces is simultaneous, but one is greater than the other. In this universe of more and less, all division into the more and the less occurs simultaneously, but both unequal divisions are cumulative in their inequality. One always overtakes and overbalances the other though both are progressing in opposite directions. Man's inhalation, for example, is simultaneously accompanied in a less degree by his exhalation, and conversely his exhalation is accompanied in a less degree by his inhalation. While he is inhaling in preponderance through his nostrils, he is exhaling in a less degree through every pore of his body. Conversely, while he is exhaling in preponderance through his nostrils, he is inhaling in a less degree through his body. The time will eventually come when the inhalation-exhalation sequences will become preponderant through his pores. He will then gradually lose vitality until disintegration has conquered his ability to integrate sufficiently to hold his body together as a unit. Degeneration will eventually conquer generation until regeneration again has its turn. All idea is repeative and no effect of motion once started ever ends. The end of an octave is but the beginning of another octave. The end of a cycle is but the beginning of another cycle. The end of a wave is but the beginning of another wave. Also, the end of a life is but the beginning of another life. There is no death. Man cannot die, nor can motion end, nor can idea evade repeativeness, nor can sex evade its sequential preponderance. Attraction and repulsion are opposite sex effects. If the law which states that "all opposite effects of motion are simultaneous in the expression of their sex opposition, but preponderant in sequence in each sex expression" is sound, then all mass which attracts also simultaneously repels. Also one of these qualities is preponderant in proportion to the preponderance of one or the other states of motion which determines the potential of the mass. Furthermore, if the law is true, any mass which is preponderant in its power to attract, eventually becomes preponderant in its power to repel. If this is true, any mass which is increasing its power to attract, must also be increasing its power to repel in excess of the increase of power to attract in order to attain its alternate right of preponderance. Conversely, for the same reason, any mass which is decreasing its power to attract, must also be decreasing its power to repel in excess of the decrease of power to attract. The excess in each instance is in universal ratio. Page 176 If this is true, there must be a point of equilibrium where the preponderance of gravitational power passes to preponderance of radiational power at both ends of the cycle of motion at which points motion is impossible, except that which is continued by impetus, for in such an equilibrium there could be no force to cause motion. It has been contended that matter could not both attract and repel for the very reason that one would counteract the other and prevent motion. This would be true if the opposing states of motion were exactly balanced in every mass. This is true only at the two passing points above referred to, for at all other positions in the wave of energy the opposing charges are unequally balanced. Sex is the result. The two passing points where the opposing forces are in equilibrium are the sexless position 0= and the double tone bi-sexual 4+ which marks the limitations of motion in any wave of energy. + The sexless position is chemically registered in the inert gases, herein known as the master tones, and the bi-sexual position is herein known as the carbon line. Through these two passing points energy can continue only because of impetus. At these two passing points all effects of motion are reversed. The orbit of expanding mass is ever drawing away from the apex of the cone of its system in opening spiral lines, following the contour of the cone toward its base. All mass of expanding orbit is ever decelerating its speed of revolution and accelerating its speed of rotation. Discharging light units or systems separate or draw away from each other, and also draw away from charging light units or systems. They not only appear to repel each other, but also seem to be repellent within themselves. Each part of every discharging light unit or system appears to repel each other part, irrespective of its potential. It radiates away from adjoining masses. It expands from within itself even as does the system of which it is a part. As light units separate one from another, they discharge each other. Discharging light units are those which are releasing potential through devitalizing exhalation. Light units or systems, which are decreasing their potential are exothermal, expanding, radiating light units. Radiating light units or systems are centrifugal. Their force is in the direction of the expanding orbits of opening spirals. The purpose of magnetism is to replace that which electricity has displaced; to dissociate, disassemble, diffuse, disintegrate and radiate that which electricity has associated, assembled, integrated and generated. Centrifugal opening spirals distribute disintegrating mass over more expanded ecliptic areas, and break up the nucleal, gravitative centers by distributing positive charge over proportionately greater areas which are in equilibrium with the greater areas of negative discharge, thus reducing potential by replacement of that which has been displaced. It has heretofore been written that all motion is spiral and all direction is curved. All direction is also universal. All mass follows spiral orbits either northerly toward, or southerly away from gravitative centers of systems. Page 177 All mass seeks the ever changing pressure zones of its own ever changing potentials, revolving and rotating always from west toward east, without any exception in any mass throughout the universe of dimension. Neither the effect of attraction nor the effect of repulsion is due to substance but to centripetal and centrifugal force of motion. The effect of attraction belongs to positive electric charge, and this, in its turn, to electric domination. The effect of repulsion belongs to negative electric discharge, and this in its turn to magnetic domination. One need have no better illustration of this truth than the piece of iron which leaps to one pole of a "magnet" and apparently is repelled by the other pole. If the attributes of attraction and repulsion belonged to substance, instead of to motion, the iron of the "magnet," would either attract toward any of its parts or repel from them all. Much of the misunderstanding regarding the effects of the so-called "magnet" is due to a lack of knowledge of electric and magnetic action and the universality of direction. An electric stream is flowing swiftly toward the apex of every one of the countless opposing spirals within the "magnetic" bar. Each opposing spiral cone of energy changes its relations in a manner which will later be made clear. The pressure and velocity of the stream within each cone of the "magnetized" bar increase in inverse ratio to the square of the lessened distance and to the cube of the lessened volume, as the volume is compressed into closer quarters. The electric excitation of the "magnetized" bar increases the oscillation of the little pumps of which all matter in motion is composed. The breathing of the light units of the "magnetized" iron is faster than that of the normal iron. The inhalation-exhalation sequences are so vastly increased that a normal piece of iron "falls" toward the direction of the flow exactly as heavy trees are uprooted and sucked into the maelstrom of the spirally swirling cones of a cyclone. The effects above described are effects of gravitative preponderance, which universally increase in the direction of north, and north is always at the conical apices of two opposed spiral electric streams which meet at gravitative centers. Substance has no relation to gravitative or to radiative effects. Neither pole is attracted to or repelled by the other. One might as reasonably assert that logs which are speeding through the sluice of an open dam are attracted by the dam and then repelled by it, rather than being carried by the movement of the rushing waters. Or, one might as reasonably assert that houses and trees which are being sucked into the cone of a whirlwind are attracted by the wind rather than by the motion of the wind. The electro-magnet, which it properly should be called, does to the iron filings exactly what the whirlwind does to the houses and trees. The accompanying drawing will show clearly how all of our familiar and safe wind pressures are upset when opposing whirlwind cones sweep over the land. All effects of motion are whirlwinds. The nearer the gravitative center, the greater the whirlwind. Page 178 The solar system is a whirlwind with Mercury swirling swiftly near the gravitative center where the vast pressures whirl it around the sun in eighty-eight days at a speed of about thirty miles each second, against the earth's eighteen miles, Jupiter's eight and Neptune's leisurely three miles per second. The gravitative center of any mass in motion is the point of greatest density and least speed - of rotation. The center of any rotating mass is the point of least axial speed. Motion ceases at the vortex of a whirlpool in the equilibrium of maximum motion-in-opposition. Magnetic streams flow universally toward the south just as electric, streams flow universally toward the north. Electric streams degenerate into magnetic streams, which find their south at the bases of cones in which the maximum motion is always in the plane of the equator of the rotating mass. These are the planes of radiation where the maximum radio-active force is near the equator, the hottest part of the surface of any mass. The centers of the bases of the generative cones are at the poles of rotation, the coldest part of any mass. Mass is disintegrated by a magnetic force exerted equatorially just as it is integrated by an electric force exerted axially. Just as the phenomenon of attraction is caused by the flow of a centripetal stream whirling spirally, with ever increasing swiftness, toward the vortex in the apex of the cone of its spiral, so is the phenomenon of repulsion caused by the flow of a centrifugal stream whirling spirally, with ever decreasing swiftness, toward the base of the cone of its spiral. The electric stream displaces substance by accumulating the universal constant, under increasingly higher pressure equilibriums, into relatively solid masses, and the magnetic stream diffuses that solidity into tenuity by releasing those high pressures. Affinity, in the chemical sense, and attraction in the electrical sense, are analogous. Both are effects of gravitation. The attraction of gravitation is but a resultant of centripetal force of which deceleration of the speed- time dimension of the universal constant and acceleration of power-time is the condition precedent. Unequal valency; in the chemical sense, and repulsion in the magnetic sense, are analogous. The repulsion of radiation is but a resultant of centrifugal force of which acceleration of speed-time dimension of the universal constant and deceleration of power-time is the condition precedent. The preponderance of one of the opposites of motion is, therefore, the condition which must be present in mass in order that it may be preponderant in its ability either to attract or to repel. Substance, then, merely appears to attract or to repel, and that appearance is relative. Both forces are equal. A preponderance of one is balanced in its opposite by a preponderance of the other. The two, added together, cause an appearance of stability which is maintained, for a time, by motion. The relative ability of a substance to attract and to repel is in the same ratio as the increase or de- crease of the opposing pressures and other dimensions which determine the potential of a charging or discharging system. In any mass the apparent ability to attract increases with increase of positive charge and decrease of volume; also the apparent ability to repel increases with increase of negative discharge and decrease of volume. Page 179 Page 180 In any mass the preponderance of the apparent ability to attract or to repel is proportionate to its preponderance of positive charge or negative discharge. In any mass increase of positive charge is accompanied by increase of negative discharge in universal ratio until the conductivity of negative discharge exceeds the inductivity of positive charge, in accordance with the universal law of sequential preponderance of all opposite effects of motion. PERIODICITY OF ATTRACTION. The relative ability of the elements of matter to appear to attract is in the order of their periodicity, as has been shown in the chart of the periodic table of the elements. The first gravitational tone is 1+, the lithium line. The second gravitational tone is 2+, the berylium line. The third gravitational tone is 3+, the boron line. There are mid-tonal pressure walls, in the seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth octaves which in their aggregate constitute one tone between 3+ and 4++. The fourth tone, 4++, is a bisexual tone in which the ability to attract is equal to the ability to repel. This progression is increasingly male in sex and increasingly electropositive in charge. PERIODICITY OF REPULSION. The relative ability of the elements to repel is in the same order. The first radiational tone is 1 — , the fluorine line. The second radiational tone is 2—, the oxygen line. The third radiational tone is 3 — , the nitrogen line. The same relatively repellent order regarding mid-tonal pressure walls prevails on the female side of 4++, as on the male side. The planes of these opposing pressure walls vary from 0° at 0= to 90° at 4++. 1+ and 1— are absolutely parallel to each other, likewise 2 + and 2— , and 3 + and 3 —, in each wave, but in each half of the wave the pressure walls oppose the opposite halves of the adjoining waves. The plane of the double tone, 4++ in the fifth octave, is at an angle of 90° to the south inertial and secondary vertical planes of their cubes, and is parallel to the primary vertical plane. The other 4* positions approximate these relations. The relations of the planes of the tonal pressure walls is of vast importance and together they form one of the most important of the dimensions. If there is such incontrovertible evidence that the ability of mass to appear to attract and to repel mass is but relative because of the variation in states of motion within each mass, is it not better to rewrite the law as it has been suggested at the beginning of this chapter? Every mass has the apparent relative ability to attract and to repel every other mass, its relative ability depending on its relative potential. Page 181 Page 182 CONTENTS CHAPTER XII GRAVITATION AND RADIATION Gravitation is the generative force and radiation is the degenerative force of the universal constant. These are the opposing powers which, within all mass, seek an equilibrium zone of pressure for the potential of that mass. Gravitation is the generative force of increasing potential and the regenerative force of decreasing potential. It is the power within the electric force of action to attract the electric force of action. It is the contractive power within electricity to divert the universal constant of energy into centripetal vortices of closing spirals of increasing speed, thereby attracting similar states of motion into an accumulation of mass the pressure of which increases toward its center. It is an expression of the power of electricity to accumulate by induction and, by so doing, to force magnetism to increase its resistance to that accumulation. It is the inductive force. It is the desire within the electric force of action to integrate into the appearance of form. It is the power of electricity to associate by displacement. Radiation is the power of magnetism to dissociate by replacement. Radiation is the degenerative force of decreasing potential. It is the power within the magnetic force of reaction to resist the electric force of action. It is the separative force which repels, spreads, separates, diffuses and redistributes that which has been assembled by the collective force. It is the conductive force. The attraction of gravitation and the repulsion of radiation is nature's simple method of distribution and redistribution of all masses, so that each mass will find its proper position. It is not proper to conceive either of these apparently opposite forces as two forces. The south wind and the north wind are not two winds. They are the same wind blowing in opposite directions. It is more correct to say that gravitation and radiation are processes. The one motive force which directs these processes is equally divided into opposite effects, but these opposite effects are unequally balanced. The unequal divisions of the two, opposites totalled together constitute an equilibrium. The One force never subdivides into any minus expression of force without counterbalancing that minus with an equal and opposite plus. Gravitation is a synthetic process of putting things together, and radiation an analytic one of taking them apart. The chemist uses these processes in every action and reaction. Consider for example the reduction of iron oxide at high temperature by passing a jet of hydrogen over it. What happens? Page 183 The hydrogen falls toward the higher potential of the oxygen of the iron which is sufficiently expanded by the high temperature to absorb the hydrogen, and the hot iron is sufficiently expanded to release the oxygen. This is an effect of gravitation in respect to the oxygen and the hydrogen. They unite, they mutually integrate, and freeze into amorphous crystals of such extended orbits that they assume the liquid state known as "water." On the contrary, it is an effect of radiation in respect to the iron and the oxygen. Both the iron and the oxygen have been brought to such a state of expansion that their ability to hold together is gradually weakened until their pressure preponderance is reversed. Attraction has changed to repulsion. The iron expels the oxygen which falls toward the proper pressure zone for so expanded a state of motion. The oxidation process is an effect of the electric pressure of gravitation. The reduction process is an effect of the magnetic pressure of radiation. They exactly balance. The reduction in valence, pressure, temperature and other dimensions of the iron is balanced by an exact increase of the dimensions of the hydrogen oxide. The plus of gravitation in any mass is always balanced by the minus of radiation in some other mass, in accordance with the pressure laws, "every pressure develops an equal and opposite pressure," and "the degeneration of any mass is exactly balanced by the regeneration of another mass." All mass is constantly in motion. This is a universe of perpetual motion. The universal constant of energy is expressed by mass in motion. Every mass is continually changing its dimensions in accordance with its relation to every other mass. Change in the position of mass causes change of every dimension of that mass. "All mass is potential out of place, and all mass constantly seeks the proper pressure zone for its changing potential." All mass constantly runs the entire gamut of every dimension of the wave of energy of which it is a swirling part, until it has run the entire cycle represented by that wave. No mass can remain fixed in position, not even that which has been apparently arrested in its motion. The apple, obeying the laws of gravitation falls to the ground to seek the pressures for its relatively high potential, where it is apparently arrested in its motion. In reality it never ceases to fall until it has reached the center of the planet. It merely changes its dimensions. The disintegrating apple rises in the air to seek the proper pressures for the relatively low potential left behind by the electric stream which continued to the gravitative center of the planet. Like all mass, the apple is simultaneously accumulating and distributing its accumulation of energy. It is both charging and discharging. The interruption of the apple's fall to the earth's center and subsequent reversal of the charge within the mass of the disintegrating apple, does not alter the opposite directions of motion either for the charge or for the discharge. Page 184 The accumulated electric potential continues spirally north by way of east in the electric stream to the planet's center, and the disintegration emanations continue south by way of west, in the magnetic stream of the earth's ecliptic. The bound energy being released by the disintegrating apple exchanges its power-time pre- ponderance for speed-time preponderance. The balancing opposite of greater power-time is within the planet. Consider familiar effects of gravitation and apply that observation to others less readily understood. The apple falls to the ground. The gas rises into the air. The planet floats in space. The apple and the gas are potentials out of place. When released one falls, the other rises. One gravitates and the other radiates toward the pressure zones of their respective accumulations of potential, and they pass each other going in opposite directions. A planet is potential in place for the moment, ……………… One column not readable in scan!!! as the stone heretofore was removed before being dropped into the water. If suddenly it were released from out beyond Neptune's orbit, what would happen? Assuming that it held itself together and did not explode in so low a pressure zone, it would fall with increasing swiftness toward the sun in a line ever slightly curving northeasterly until it reached the orbit from which it had been removed. Arriving at the plane of its former orbit, it would sink below it toward the sun with decelerating speed, then after oscillating• above and below for a time to lose its impetus and to find the inertial equilibrium position of its potential, it would eventually proceed in approximately the same orbit, as before. It would have been somewhat damaged by expansion and surface ionization. Its potential would be slightly lowered as a consequence of its adventure in lower pressure zones, and therefore its orbit would be slightly farther from the sun than before its removal. Once more, imagine the giant hand picking up the planet and removing it in the opposite direction, toward the sun instead of away from it. If suddenly released within Mercury's orbit, for example, what would happen? For the purpose of analogy, let us forget the fact that its low density in comparison to that of Mercury would cause its surface to become white hot and its oceans to disappear in a tenuous vapor. It would fall away from the sun curving southeasterly towards its orbital plane of pressure at an ever decreasing speed, exactly as an atom of gas would rise from the earth and fall at an ever decreasing speed, in an ever curving southeasterly line toward its proper plane of pressure. The dimensions of this planet would not permit it to remain in Mercury's 'pressure zone, any more than the density of a wooden ball would allow the ball to remain under water in the pressure suitable to a stone. It would approximately find its former orbit, but because of the increased potential absorbed during its adventure in higher pressure zones, its orbit would be slightly nearer to the sun' than before its removal. This universe of motion is one of equilibrium from the beginning of motion to maximum motion, during which progression stability exchanges its reality for an illusion of stability. There is a true position for every potential. Page 185 The true position must be found for the exact dimensions of the universal constant of energy which is stored up as mass. The desire of mass to find the position appropriate to its changing potential is the cause of all motion of mass. All mass, seeking the true position for its changing potential, displaces other mass which is also seeking the true position for its changing potential. All mass displaced must be replaced by its exact equal and opposite. The present theory that the moon would fall to the earth if it were not sustained by its motion is a mistaken one. The moon is not sustained in its position because of its motion, but because of its potential which demands its own equilibrium pressure. The earth and the moon push each other away by their preponderance of expansion pressure with greater violence than they pull each other together by their contraction pressure. The moon is assisting in the replacement of displaced energy and is ever on its way toward inertia, following its spirally curving path through such aeons of time that its successive orbits appear exactly equal in dimension. If the moon were detained in one position for a time, it would race to the place where normally it would have been had it not been detained. Just so with the planets. The earth would not fall into the sun if motion ceased, any more than a balloon would drop to the earth, or a cork sink in water. The hydrogen expelled from the sun cannot drop back to the sun. The expansion pressure of the sun's radioactivity will not permit it. The expulsion of the planets by the sun and the impossibility of their return is based on the same principle. The difference is only one of relative potential. Mass in motion cannot cease its motion. Mass is an unstable condition which cannot remain unchanged for one second. Instability cannot become stabilized. The motions of the planets and their satellites are not continuations of an original impetus, nor are they continued because of the non-resistance of the ether. They are revolving in their orbits and rotating upon their axes because they are floating in the flowing streams and whirling vortices of their own particular waves of energy accumulation. They cannot do otherwise than follow the direction of the pressures from behind, and the suction from in front. They are ever seeking a place of rest and never finding it, so long as they are burdened with the form of concept. Rest from ceaseless motion can only come to them in inertia by total redistribution of their accumulated mass. Diffusion and disappearance in inertia is the lot of planets as it is of men and of all evolving things. Slowly changing their dimensions, they are all completing their centrifugal journeys south by way of west to their havens of rest where they await their regeneration. Slowly expanding, they are drawing away from the sun, assisted by the sun in their recession. The sun of the system is pushing them all slowly away to cool, and drawing unto itself new light units for its regeneration which will enable it to replace the ejected ,planets and to continue its own potency. Page 186 The planets are the finished product of the sun's fashioning and the regenerative light units are the raw product from which the planets are fashioned. As the sun is preponderantly pushing the planets, so are the planets doing, likewise with their satellites, the grandchildren of the sun. When the planets left the equatorial plane of the sun they were even then preponderantly radiative masses of such dimensions that their expulsion was imperative. As the sun's desire to push them farther and farther away exceeds its desire to attract them, their dimensions gradually adjust themselves to this desire. The nearer a mass is to its sun, the denser the mass, the higher its freezing point, the higher its equilibrium pressure the smaller its volume, the faster its revolution, the slower its rotation, the more nearly parallel its plane of revolution to the solar ecliptic, the greater the positive charge, the greater the eccentricity and the higher the potential, the greater is the ability of mass to attract the positive charge of other mass and to expel its negative discharge. The farther a mass is from its sun, the more tenuous the mass, the lower its freezing point, the lower its equilibrium pressure wall, the larger its volume, the slower its revolution, the faster its rotation, the greater the angle of its plane of revolution to the solar ecliptic, the less its eccentricity,, the weaker the negative discharge and the lower the potential, the less the ability to attract other mass and to assist its own expulsion from other mass of higher potential. To expect this planet to fall to the sun if its motion were checked is equivalent to expecting an inflated balloon to drop to earth. If these statements are demonstrable, then the Newtonian law cannot be true, for every change of dimension whatsoever in any mass alters the ability of that mass to conform to the requirements of that law either by exceeding those requirements or by falling short of them. Every change of dimension in a mass changes all the dimensions in the mass. This universe of dimension is divided into pressure compartments of states of motion which vary in orderly ratios. Between the compartments are inertial walls which readjust their positions with every changing dimension of motion in the universe. A ball falling to the ground simultaneously displaces every atom in the universe and changes its dimensions. Something must simultaneously rise from this planet toward inertia, to replace the falling ball. Mass expanded to greater volume must rise to the proper pressure zone for that increased volume. Low potential must rise to replace high potential which has fallen. The farthermost star must contract or expand to adjust its density to the changed potential thus caused. All of the planets and satellites of any system owe their positions of the moment to their dimensions and respective relations of the moment. They are all constantly falling toward the violet of disappearance, in positions appropriate to their expanding dimensions of decreasing potentials. In the same way, all of the generative light units which are regenerating any system are constantly falling toward the yellow of maximum incandescent appearance, in positions appropriate to their contracting dimensions of increasing potentials. Dimensions are as relative as the state of motion which they measure. All dimensions of mass simultaneously contract and expand with its changing potentials. The inertial planes which lie between any two masses or systems are relatively closer together in dense compact systems than in expanded systems of more widely separated parts. Page 187 If opposing dense masses are forced into closer proximity, the four pressure zones which lie between the gravitational centers of the masses and their inertial planes are more restricted. The more restricted the pressure zones of a system, the more restricted the orbits of all planets and satellites within the four pressure zones of that system. Restricted orbits demand an orderly acceleration of all masses revolving within them. Accelerated mass revolving around the nucleus of a system increases the generative power of the vortex of that system, its maximum increase being at the perihelions of the planes of revolution of all the masses of the system. Accelerated revolution charges. Charging bodies attract. Accelerated rotation discharges. Discharging bodies repel. The ability of a mass to attract increases as the speed of revolution increases. The ability of a mass to repel increases as the speed of rotation decreases. Increase of generative power of a system means increase of the centripetal force of the system. Increase of the centripetal force of a system means increase of the potential of a system. Increase of potential means increase of positive charge. Increase of positive charge means increase of power to attract. The ability of one mass to attract another depends upon the relative positive charge of each and its relative position in respect to other masses. Increase of speed of revolution of the planets of a system means deceleration of rotation of the planets of that system. Deceleration of rotation of the planets of a system means decrease of the centrifugal force and consequent increase of the centripetal force of that system. The ability of one mass to repel another depends upon the relative negative discharge of each and its relative position in respect to other masses. Let us repeat the first law of gravitation. "Every mass has the relative apparent ability to attract and to repel every other mass, its relative ability depending upon its relative potential." Increased centripetal force due to increased speed of revolution of masses revolving in restricted vortices, together with the lessened centrifugal force caused by retarding the rotation of the masses revolving in such vortices, necessarily raises the potential of a system. All dimensions of such systems change with the increased ability of the system to generate. Volume decreases. Orbital areas decrease. Decrease of volume is exactly balanced by acceleration of revolution. Equal areas must be covered in contracted orbits as in expanded orbits of equal mass: In a contracted orbit, thirty trillion revolutions per second may be necessary to balance the area covered by an expanded orbit making one revolution in ten years, but an equilibrium of the universal constant must be maintained. Melting points are higher in contracted orbits. All standard units simultaneously change. Just so with all other dimensions. Their change would be purely relative and always in balance. The coefficients of all changes of dimensions of given masses would be in equilibrium at all times as equal totals of the universal constant. The attraction of gravitation in favoring the generation of energy is enabling electricity to accumulate as mass. Page 188 All mass consists of energy accumulated by the attraction of gravitation into the appearance of form. All form is held together more or less closely by the relative force of gravitation which accompanies mass of various dimensions and relations. The law for big mass is the same as that for little mass. The law of gravitation which maps out the orbit of the light unit within the atom is exactly the same as that which maps out the orbit of a planet of a solar system. In considering the effects of gravitation, it is difficult to project one's mind beyond the confines of this solar system. In fact one's observations and experiences are so purely local that one's mind is rather closely bound to the effects of gravitation upon this planet alone. It is difficult to realize that this solar system is, on a large scale, but the repeative effect of an atom of iron or manganese. It is difficult to realize that the planetary masses within the atom of iron have as relatively great a variation of ability to attract and to repel as have the planets of our solar system. It is also difficult to realize that our whole solar system is subject to the gravitational pull of the north overtone point of the wave of which it is but one atom. Science considers the attraction of gravitation of the solar system as an entirely different effect from the effect of motion within an atomic system. Atomic motion is presumed to be non-subject to the laws of gravitation. Science names one "gravitation" and the other an "electrical effect." Both effects are the same. Also are both effects born of the same conditions. Within an atom the planets move in the planes of the orbits of their proper and changing pressures in a constant endeavor to find the proper pressures of their changing potentials, exactly as do the planets of a solar system. Until it is very near the nucleal sun, the charging light unit of a generative atom does not take a short cut across lots through higher pressures to fall crashing into its sun any more than does the charging light units of a solar system. It contracts gradually as it falls spirally toward the sun, and its potential, equilibrium pressure and melting point constantly rise as it falls. Nor does the discharging light unit of a degenerative atom take a short cut across lots through lowering pressures to break suddenly and explosively into a tenuous cloud at the inertial plane of disappearance, at the farthermost bounds of its wave cycle. It leaves its nucleal sun with great force until it finds its proper potential. Then it expands gradually as it falls spirally away from its sun, its potential, equilibrium pressure and melting point constantly lowering as it falls. If the movements of planets and satellites are effects of gravitation and the same effects in smaller mass are "electrical effects," why do smaller masses exactly follow the laws of the larger masses? The light units of an atom seem independent of the earth's gravitative center but actually they are not. All are revolving true to the planes of their respective potentials. The moons of Jupiter do exactly the same thing in respect to the solar gravitative center of this system, yet they are not considered "an electrical effect." They fall toward the sun and away from it with the same apparent disregard that light units of a system evidence in respect to other masses outside their own systems. Page 189 Even their accelerations and decelerations are effected by causes other than by whether they are moving toward the sun or away from it. A later volume will precisely chart the swirling drift of the so-called "ether of space" within and outside of the solar ecliptic area. This drift carries the planets of the solar system with it as relentlessly as particles are carried in the swirling eddies of a rushing stream. All effects of gravitation are electric effects, and all effects of radiation are magnetic effects. All effects of motion are electro-magnetic effects. All mass has a series of gravitative centers toward which it evidences its allegiance in the order of its potential relation. As a private in the army takes his orders from an under officer, whose group in turn moves as a unit under command of a higher officer and so on until the entire army is coordinated under the command of one supreme officer, so does low potential obey the gravitational commands of low potential, and various states of accumulated potential obey the gravitational commands of accumulated potential, and so on until the entire mass is coordinated under one supreme gravitative center. Every wave of energy constructs resisting pressure walls between its south and north planes, and no mass can disregard those pressures. Within each wave of energy, all mass moves from low to high and back again to low potential as a marble follows a groove, or as a train follows a track, or as a brook finds the sea. Let us consider each effect, that of falling and rising, as both gravitative and radiative, also electric and magnetic. An apple falling to the ground is an inductive electrical effect. It falls to the ground because gravitation attracts it to the ground. The positive charge of the apple seeks the greater positive charge of the earth. The falling apple charges the planet by induction, which raises the planet's potential. The greater proximity of the masses also raises the planet's potential. The induced positive charge of the apple continues centripetally in the generative flow toward the center of the planet. The resistance to the assimilation of the apple's positive charge by the planet registers itself in the exact amount of heat which left the apple. The absorption of the apple's heat, contraction pressure, potential and electropositive charge is an electrical effect of discharge of the apple and an added charge to the planet. It is an exothermic effect in respect to the apple, and an endothermic effect in respect to the planet. The absorption of the apple's electric potential by the planet is a gravitational effect because the apple and the planet mutually attract each other and it is also an electric effect because of the absorption of the positive charge of one by the other. Both apple and planet fall toward each other. If the apple were as large and as dense as the planet, both would move toward each other with equal speed. The apple is so small and the planet so large that the deviation of the earth's path is negligible. Not so with a body like the moon, however, which materially affects the earth's orbit as the two unequal partners whirl in their celestial dance. Returning to the apple and the planet, as the positive charge of the apple continues its centripetal journey toward the centre of the planet, the negative discharge of the apple expands toward disappearance in the opposite direction. Page 190 One "falls," the other "rises." It is the positive charge which "falls" and the negative discharge which "rises." The positive charge falls toward positive charge expelling negative discharge as radioactive emanations. If positive charge falls toward positive charge, it is logical to say that the principle which governs positive charge alone has the ability to attract. The disintegrated apple rises from the ground because radiation repels it and positive charge expels it. The negative discharge of the apple seeks the greater expanse of low potential. Its rising is a radiative effect in respect to the planet from which it is centrifugally rising to seek its own potential. As it rises, it expands until it finds its orbit in the pressure zone of its potential. It may impact against the inertial plane of another mass toward which it would centripetally fall and become regenerated. This would be a gravitative effect in respect to the mass toward which it fell.
