---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 10 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 10

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 10 of 15
**Words**: ~7,397
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

Its regeneration by impact against the inertial plane of another mass causes it to contract. It becomes electro-positive. Its positive charge is attracted by the potential of the mass toward which it falls and by which it is absorbed as nourishment and finally discharged once more as radiative emanations. This is the manner of assembling and disassembling of every form of idea. This is the manner of accumulation and distribution of all energy. This is the manner in which all bodies are nourished and famished. This is the process of vitalization and de, vitalization. All effects of motion are gravitational and radiational effects. Also they are electric and magnetic effects just as they are likewise chemical effects. Let us now consider the various gravitational and radiational expressions one by one. Fortunate it is that all of these expressions have dimensions and that all dimensions are measurable. Let us first briefly consider them in their relation to the subject under discussion, which is the apparent power to attract or to repel. Let us then, consider ways and means of measuring them and see if, by so doing, some of nature's long guarded secrets will not become simple to comprehend and to utilize. Page 191 CONTENTS CHAPTER XIII EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION UNIVERSAL DIRECTION The cycle of a wave is an orderly progression in the universal direction from south to north by the way of east, and back again to south by the way of west. All masses revolve from the west toward the cast around the nucleal centers of their systems throughout the entire cycle of their waves. All masses rotate upon axes throughout the entire cycle of their waves from the west toward the east of their masses. To these laws, there are no exceptions. Numerous apparent exceptions, such as the retrogression of Neptune and her satellite, the moons of Uranus and the outer moons of Jupiter and Saturn, are thoroughly in accord with the absolute laws of universal direction. All direction of motion is universal. Motion implies direction, demands direction in which to move. In the dimensionless universe of motion, direction is non-existent. In the universe of the illusion of dimension, direction is one of the necessary illusions which creates the appearance of dimension. Direction is, therefore, an illusion which we familiarly call an effect of motion. All effects of motion are expressed in apparent opposites. It is well to recall the fact that the concept of motion is universally simultaneous and its expression sequential. The attraction of gravitation and the repulsion of radiation are instantaneous and continuous. Time is not consumed in transferring the concept of any intended expression of energy throughout the dimensionless universe. The action which is an expression of the intent has dimension and therefore consumes time. In other words, the concept image of all idea of thinking is universally simultaneous, but the production and reproduction of the form of idea, through motion, is a series of events which are sequential. All opposite effects are positive and negative, or more and less, or plus and minus. Like all other effects of motion in the universe of dimension, direction has its opposites. In this universe of more and less, the opposites of that effect of motion which we call "direction" are north and south. All direction begins at the pressureless plane of south and ends at the opposed pressures plane of north. North is the electro-positive plus direction of the more, and south is the electro-negative minus direction of the less. The plus electric force is always away from the south toward north and the minus magnetic force is always away from the north and back to the south. North begins at south at the point where energy expresses itself by impact against the inertial plane. . Page 192 At this point, energy simultaneously measures the intensity of its concept in harmonic circles on inertial planes over areas which become the bases of opposing cones of energy. It also measures the intensity of its concept at the intersection of the primary and secondary vertical inertial planes at altitudes which become the apices of those opposing cones. The axes of those cones then become the charging pole areas of all mass and the line of its forming wave. Energy simultaneously measures its volume intensity by connecting the circular inertial bases of conceptual cones with their apices. The harmonic circles which measure the bases of cones are the octave conceptual dimensions of the energy wave of measurable dimension. The apices of the cones are the overtones of the wave. The line of increasing force is from the magnetic base following the northerly electric stream to the apex of every cone of energy. Conversely, the line of decreasing force is from the electric apex following the southerly magnetic stream to the base of every cone of energy. South is the direction toward stability and the force of non-motion of substance in inertia. South is the plane of inertia where every expression of energy begins to gather its force from the expanded area of its harmonic circles, with the intent of overcoming the inertia of substance by concentrating it into harmonic spheres at its overtone points of north. All energy expresses itself in spiral waves. The inertial plane of every wave is its south. Every direction away from the inertial plane is north. South is the plane of inertia which apparently divides, as inertia is overcome, into two series of opposing planes of motion, the positive and the negative series. Each series of opposing planes of motion tilt spirally away from inertia on opposite sides until the harmonic circles which define their areas, have not only attained angles of 90° to it, but have turned half way around. This process can best be visualized by placing two discs together and viewing them edgewise as lines. Then simultaneously tilt and rotate these discs away from each other on opposite edges until they are seen as two circular planes. South is the birthplace of motion where inertia is overcome and the wheels of the universal machine begin slowly to revolve. South is the birthplace of all effects of motion where reality ends and illusion begins. South is the birthplace of idea which becomes more defined in ever increasing solidity as the form of idea contracts toward the north into harmonic spheres which are diffused into tenuity as they expand toward disappearance on the south inertial plane of their birth. South is the birthplace of time which accelerates all effects of motion in relative ratios as it contracts toward the north, and decelerates them as it expands on its return to south. South is the aphelion point of all masses moving in orbits around a point of north. South is the birthplace of all other dimensions of motion which contract all their standard units of measurement as they concentrate in the electric stream flowing north, and expand those same standard units of measurement as they decentrate in the magnetic stream flowing south. North is the direction of instability and of the force of motion-in-opposition, where the opposites of every expression of energy meet in their maximum of expression. North is always the vortex of the whirlpool at which every opposite expression of energy meets in bi-sexual union. North is the point where sex meets sex, where sexes meld as a bi-sexual one sex. Page 193 Page 194 North is the point of self reproduction of the energy of its wave. North is the perihelion point of all masses moving in orbits around a point of north. North is the point where generation ends, degeneration begins and reproduction repeats. Generation is a journey to north from south and degeneration is a return. Reproduction is a repetition of that journey to mass from plane. North is the meeting point of all of the positive-negative, plus-minus, male-female pressure walls which have been erected toward both northerly overtone points of every wave, to help sustain the illusion of stability which this universe of motion constantly produces. Form in motion is a reflection of concept in inertia. Form is conceived in harmonic plane circles of non - motion, and reflected in harmonic spheres of motion. North is the point of maximum instability where the maximum gyroscopic motion of the universal machine lends its assistance in supporting the reflection of stability. The bi-sexual plane of the overtone of every wave is the flywheel of the universal machine, revolving with gyroscopic perfection of balance at an angle of 90° to the inertial plane of concept of its wave of energy. In this reflected position, its resistance planes are parallel. There are no bevel gears, no precessional motions and no intersecting planes. Gyroscopic imperfection of motion lies in precessional motion of wheels with bevel gears, and in intersecting planes of resisting pressures. No better example of gyroscopic imperfection of motion could be found than our own solar system in which all of the planets revolve in planes of some variance to the solar equatorial plane, where resistance pressure walls intersect, and where precessional motion necessitates bevel gears for every wheel. The overtone plane of gyroscopic perfection is the plane where north meets south and east meets west in bi-sexual unity. The overtones of gyroscopic perfection are where the electric poles have contracted to a point, and where the ever shortening positive cones of energy turn their outer positive contours to inner negative ones by expanding their bases to the planes of their apices. The planes of gyroscopic imperfection are the opposing planes of pressure walls ever moving tonally in locked potential positions toward the ultimate north of their waves of energy. These planes of gyroscopic imperfection are the tonal positions of the elements of matter in which various states of energy are locked within ever contracting pressure compartments of the cones of their waves. The opposing planes are the positive-negative equal and opposite actions and reactions which constitute the more and the less of positive and negative action and reaction. At these planes, reproduction of motion is only possible through union. These planes are the planes of sex, male and female, which constitute the division of all effects of motion into the opposites of motion. North is the direction of the action of effort, as south is the direction of its reaction. North is the point toward which electricity apparently attempts to gather the universal substance together into one solid inert mass, but failing in this it gathers an illusion of the substance into innumerable separate harmonic spheres through motion of the thinking process. Page 195 Page 196 All direction is an effect of gravitation and radiation. All gravitative effects are electrically dominated. All gravitative effects are the result of inhalation. All radiative effects are magnetically dominated. All radiative effects are the result of exhalation. Electricity moves always in the direction of north, by the way of east. Magnetism moves always south, by the way of west. Nature divides these pressure compartments into octaves, four of which are contracting pressures which she gives to electric control, and the other four are expanding pressures which she gives to magnetic control. Between the third and the fourth pressure walls in the seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth octaves, the opposing pressures become so great that nature creates mid-tonal pressure compartments where storm centers are much more concentrated and velocity of revolution is multiplied. Nature accumulates intensity of energy expression in every wave from the southerly inertial line of the inert gases to the northerly carbon line of maximum motion. The cones of energy, within which all expressions of motion are contained, are ever changing their positions so that their apices are ever moving spirally away from points of concept and returning to those same points. The accompanying charts of the mechanics of motion will more clearly demonstrate nature's process of energy accumulation and distribution. The spiral direction of all motion is the cause of the two other opposites of direction known as east and west. East is a contraction of the inertial south of concept and memory of form toward the north of reflection of concept through motion, and west is north's expansive return toward south. Motion cannot express itself in the direction of a straight line. Newton's first law of physics which states that a moving body left to itself moves on forever in a straight line with a uniform velocity, is not in conformity with the laws of motion. In this universe of varying pressures, all masses floating "in space" constantly move in the direction of their changing potentials. This direction is always spiral. All motion being spiral, all direction being curved, and all pressure planes being conic sections, electric action can not proceed directly north from south in a straight line, but must progress toward north in a spiral direction. As electro-positive action proceeds northerly, it contracts. The direction of contraction is north by the way of east. East is toward least rotation at the gravitative center of any mass. The maximum of east is where east meets north following the charging areas of mass. As electro-negative action returns toward south, it expands. Page 197 Page 198 The direction of expansion is south by the way of west. West is toward greatest rotation at the surface of any mass. The maximum of west is where west meets south following the ecliptic plane of any mass. The minimum exertion of the easterly force of contraction must therefore be in the plane of the equator cf any mass, and its force directed toward the gravitative center of that mass. In every mass the maximum exertion of the easterly force of contraction is within the charging areas of the generative cones of which the pole of rotation is the axis. In every mass the maximum exertion of the westerly force of expansion is within the discharging areas of the radiative cones of which the equator is the base. In every mass north meets east at the pole of rotation, the axis of the generative cones of energy, of which the north easterly electric stream and the south westerly magnetic lines of force are the opposing contours. It may be well to recall the law of generation: "All mass is generated and regenerated by a contractive pressure exerted in the direction of its gravitative center. Its minimum of generative pressure is exerted from its equatorial plane and its maximum pressure from its pole." South meets west at the axes of the radiative cones of energy of which the expansion of the equatorial plane of revolution into the isoclinal planes of magnetic force are the contours. Thus may we repeat the law of radiation of mass: "All mass is radiated and diffused by an expansive pressure exerted in the direction of its surface. Its minimum of radiative pressure is exerted from its pole and its maximum from its equatorial plane." East contracts toward north and west expands toward south. Contraction is centripetal and expansion is centrifugal. The increase of centripetal force of any mass is in the direction of generation, and the increase of centrifugal force is in the direction of radiation. Centripetal force accumulates and centrifugal force dissipates. Mass is accumulated in the direction of its generation, and dissipated in the direction of its radiation. Centripetal force decelerates rotation and accelerates revolution. Centrifugal force accelerates rotation and decelerates revolution. The deceleration of rotation is in the direction of generation and deceleration of revolution is in the direction of radiation. All vortices turn from west to east and their apices point to north. If the above laws are well founded, the directions of east and north must be related to the attraction of gravitation. Also, the directions of west and south must be related to the repulsion of radiation. Also, if deceleration of rotation increases in the centripetal, easterly direction of contraction, decelerated rotation must, in some manner, be related to the attraction of gravitation. Conversely, if acceleration of rotation increases in the centrifugal, westerly direction of expansion, accelerated rotation must, in some manner, be related to the repulsion of radiation. Also, if acceleration of revolution increases in the centripetal, easterly direction of contraction, accelerated revolution must, in some manner, be related to the attraction of gravitation. Conversely, if revolution decreases in the centrifugal, westerly direction of expansion, decelerated revolution must, in some manner, be related to the repulsion of radiation. Page 199 Page 200 CONTENTS CHAPTER XIV UNIVERSAL MATHEMATICS—UNIVERSAL RATIOS Universal mathematics are basically simple dimensions in ratios of equal and opposite tonal actions and reactions of opposite expressions of the One force. All expression of force is either plus or minus equilibrium of motion-in-inertia. Universal mathematics are based on the plus and minus relationships of tonal pressures due to the opposition of sex, force and motion. Opposition means plus and minus. There can be no expression of force without the evidence of that expression in pressures. All dimensions are tonal. All expression of force is tonal. All pressures are tonal. All effects of motion are tonal. All tones are definite relations. All definite relations are in accord with the simple formula of the locked potentials. All direction is either toward the electric force of higher potential which is increasingly resisted or toward the magnetic force of lower potential which is increasingly assisted in the universal ratio. All directions are pressure directions. This universe of motion is a universe of varying pressures which cause that motion. All pressures are either the contraction pressures of charging mass or the expansion pressures of discharging mass. Let us add to the pressure laws a dimension law. All dimensions contract in the direction of electric force and expand in the direction of magnetic force in universal ratio. Equilibrium of motion-in-inertia is represented by zero. Zero in sex, force and motion means an equilibrium of pressures. Four means maximum pressure opposition. The intermediate twos and threes, plus and minus, are the comings and goings between the cold zero of expansion in the violet of inertia and the hot four of contraction in the yellow of opposed motion. Zero in force does not represent nothingness, nor does plus mean more than nothing nor minus mean less than nothing. Such a concept of mathematics is not in accord with a universe of the illusion of motion. The One substance is a tangible substance. It is SOMETHING. This is not an empty universe. It is not a void. Non-dimension does not mean nothingness. The universe of the One thinking substance is not one of quantity or dimension. It is a substance capable of causing an appearance of quantity through the life principle of the substance which we term "energy." The universal constant of energy is X quantity. X quantity is apparently divisible. This divisibility of quantity and its dimensions are relative and measurable. The relations of its dimensions are in fixed ratios. These ratios are simple and absolute, but their apparent variability is complex. Page 201 The universal constant may be added to or multiplied by, but its accumulation never varies in its relative dimensions. The dimension X is unimportant for it represents the illusion of a total of apparent motion which disappears in the equilibrium of inertia. The dimensions of relative ratios are important, for by knowledge of these relations one will be enabled to assemble divided quantities in any desired multiple to produce any desired effect. All dimensions are relative. All dimensions are either more or less than equilibrium. This is a universe of more and less. Every effort of motion which is added to must be equally subtracted from. Mathematics are bounded by the absolute limits of effects of motion measured by adding to or by subtracting from in universal ratio. Mathematics cannot transcend universal limitations. Multiplication and division are but ratios of more and less. This universe of dimension is limited in its Cexpression to more and less. All units are either plus or minus, therefore all systems other than the double tone unit systems 504t and 100= are either plus or minus in their pressure totals. Every plus pressure total must be balanced by a minus one to maintain a system in equilibrium. No mathematical conclusion, the product of which does not yield an equilibrium, can be a correct conclusion. The product of every mathematical conclusion must balance as an equilibrium in order for it to be a correct conclusion. If correct conclusions regarding effects of motion are mathematically demonstrable, they are also mechanically demonstrable. Also they are chemically and electrically demonstrable. Also they are measurable as dimensions in C:heir potential relations of plus X or minus X. The universal see-saw is ever tilting above and below its balancing point in inertia. Both movements are simultaneous and exactly balanced. The wave is the universal see-saw within which all dimensions are measured. Many times in these pages it has been stated that a change in any one dimension causes a simultaneous change in all of the other dimensions. A sphere which is doubled in its radius is squared in its plane area in section and cubed in its volume. A mass, which has expanded to the cube of its former volume, freely floating in space could not have so expanded without changing its potential position to one appropriate to double its former distance from its gravitative center but in its same plane. In such a position the constant of opposing pressures is one-eighth that of the original position, for the same constant of pressure has been spread over eight times the volume. In such a position the constant of temperature has also been expanded to cover eight times the volume. Page 202 Page 203 All temperature dimensions of expanding mass increase in their expansion dimension, registering greater cold, and decrease in their contraction dimension, registering greater heat. It must not be forgotten that all effects of motion are expressed in their plus and minus opposites. All plus effects of motion have been clearly defined as generative, contractive effects, and all minus effects have been defined as radiative, expansive effects. It must not be forgotten that all mass is either preponderantly charging, or adding to, or it is preponderantly discharging, or subtracting from. For this reason all effects of motion in mass must be measured in both of their opposite dimensions, their plus and their minus dimension. The plus dimension shall herein be called "the contraction dimension." The contraction dimension is the charging dimension of the electro-positive force which winds the cosmic clock. The minus dimension shall herein be called "the expansion dimension." The expansion dimension is the discharging dimension of the electro-negative force which unwinds the cosmic clock. To illustrate, consider an expanded mass at B, of double its diameter at A. Page 204 Page 205 Assume A to be 60,000,000 miles from the sun. At B it would be twice its former distance or 120,000,000 miles. At B its expansion temperature dimension, as registered in cold, would have increased by eight times just as its volume would have increased by the cube of its former volume. At B its contraction temperature dimension, as registered in heat, would have decreased to one- eighth because the heat units would have become spread over eight times its former space. At B, rotation, the speed-time expansion dimension would be the square, in direct ratio, of the position at A. Conversely at B revolution, the speed-time contraction dimension would be the square, in inverse ratio, of the position at A. Just so with all of its pressure dimensions and effects, from density to ionization, and from ionization to time, sex or crystallization. The charts herein printed clearly show the tonal relations of all potential positions in the wave. It has heretofore been written that all effects of motion are expressed in seven equal tones of four units. The seven tones of the universal constant are consecutively removed, one from the other, the square of the distance to the next highest potential. The energy of each of the four units is exactly equal to that of each of the others. 1+, for example, is removed from 2+ by the square of the distance to 3 +, which is the next highest potential. By a study of the accompanying dimension parts one can readily see that any change in the expansion or contraction dimension of any effect of motion is in either direct ratio or inverse ratio to the square of the distance, area or plane dimensions, or to the cube of the volume dimension. All dimensions are pressure dimensions. All dimensions simultaneously expand and contract in opposite directions of the same ratio. All effects of motion are measurable either in distance, area or volume ratios. Also all are measurable in both the ratios of contraction and of expansion pressure. The ratios of contraction and of expansion pressure shall herein be termed "The universal ratios." Expansion pressure is in direct ratio to the square of the distance, area, plane, orbit or time unit, and to the cube of the volume. Contraction pressure is in inverse ratio to the square of the distance, area, plane, orbit or time unit, and to the cube of the volume. Every mass in the universe occupies a measurable potential position. With distance, plane and area dimensions given, any planet or satellite in the solar system can be measured in all of its dimensions by contracting or expanding the standard units of this planet in universal ratios as a comparison. Let us consider some of these effects. We know the diameter of Jupiter, its plane of orbit and its distance from the sun. From these we can easily determine its potential position and rotation period. Let us roughly demonstrate the principle and check the result by our actual knowledge of its rotation period. For simplicity, let us bring Jupiter back to our known potential position and give it a standard unit of rotation from our knowledge of our own position. Page 206 By calculating in inverse universal ratio it is an easy matter to determine that the diameter of Jupiter was about 17,000 miles when it was in the earth's potential position. With more than twice the earth's circumference and rotating at the speed of the swirling spiral discharging ecliptic area of this particular part of the solar vortex which we occupy, it would take more than twice the time the earth would take to complete its turning. Roughly, its day would be about fifty hours. That being ascertained, its rotation period, if it were in the earth's plane, would be about eleven hours. Allowing the difference of about an hour in greater speed for the slight difference in plane, its rotation, if precisely calculated, would check with the known rotation of nine hours and fifty-five minutes. In calculating Mar's rotation, its difference of plane would retard rotation so appreciably that its day would be lengthened by about nine hours more than it would be if it were in the earth's plane. For another example, let us calculate what the rotation of the earth will be when it is 360,000,000 miles from the sun. Let us assume an even twenty-four hours as its present standard unit, an even 8,000 miles as its diameter, and 90,000,000 miles its distance from the sun, ignoring the fractions and loss by radiation. At 180,000,000 miles its diameter will be 16,000 miles and at 360,000,000 miles it must be 32,000 miles. At 180,000,000 miles its day must be twelve hours and at 360,000,000 miles it would be six hours. When in this position its density would be about one sixty-fourth of ours and on its surface iron would melt at about 22°. It is hard …………. Unreadable lines….. If we similarly work the other way toward the sun and calculate the longer periodic day of Mercury, we should find that Mercury, if in our plane, would rotate in about eleven days. Mercury is about 7° removed from us in plane n the direction of higher pressures. It is, in fact, in about the plane of the maximum expansion pressure opposition of this solar tornado, so by calculating the increasing pressure resistance in that position we find Mercury's day to be approximately 800,800 of our days. This means that the positive charge of Mercury is so preponderant that its day must be practically a continuous one. Let us for a moment consider the vast unsuspected range of temperatures and densities, of this solar system. The temperature of the sun's crust is presumed to be about 6,000°. In reality, it goes into the inconceivable pressures of hundreds of billions of degrees. This is easily demonstrated. Consider, for example, the melting point of iron on this planet as 1,500°. In the higher potential position of half this distance, or 45,000,000 miles, iron would freeze at 12,000°. At 22,500,000 miles its melting point would jump to 96,000°. By continuing in the universal ratios for pressures, the figures leap so amazingly fast that it is over 200,000,000,000° when still 187,500 miles away from the sun and 8° away from its plane of high pressure. Considering this, one need no longer wonder at the tremendous speed of hydrogen expulsion from the sun or be mystified by its corona. Density, being measured by pressure laws, would place this dimension in the sun at more than a million times the density of this planet instead of less than one-half. Mass would correspondingly increase into the …………. Unreadable lines….. With a few simple facts of position, rotation periods and other dimensions can be easily calculated. Page 207 The astronomer of to-day must necessarily find markings to measure the dimensions of rotation. He can find none that are definite on Uranus, Neptune or Mercury. Hence, his conclusions must be conjecture and therefore unreliable. By the aid of the laws of motion herein con-mined, conjecture is removed from the science of astronomy thus making it now possible for it to live up to its intent as an exact science. Any relative dimension in any position within a mass can be determined by applying to that position the laws of universal ratios. Page 208 Page 209 CONTENTS CHAPTER XV EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION THE ELECTRIC CHARGING POLES AND MAGNETIC DISCHARGING BASES Every particle of matter in this universe is connected with every other particle of matter by electric charging poles which are the controls of opposing electro-magnetic cones of energy. The apices of these opposing cones meet at the gravitative centers of every particle of matter. The bases of these opposing cones meet at the inertial planes which lie between any two masses. . The gravitative center of every particle of matter is the telegraphic center of communication, and the electric poles are the channels of communication. By means of this connection, every particle of matter in the universe is grayitatively and radiatively informed of any change of dimension in any other mass. All mass simultaneously responds to these communications by a sympathetic contractive or expansive readjustment of its own dimensions. The electric poles are vortices which control the northerly flowing electric stream and determine the southerly flowing magnetic stream. All energy expresses itself in motion. All motion is expressed in waves. All waves are sequentially evolved by electric actions into accumulations of mess around minute whirlpool storm centers. All whirlpool storm centers are formed by resistant magnetic reactions. All waves, all effects of motion and all dimensions of motion within the wave are measured by the opposition of the electric poles and magnetic bases. Opposition between electric and magnetic flows begins on the south inertial planes. The two flows pass each other at 180°, and the opposition reaches its maximum at an angle of 90° to the inertial planes. During this progression the 180° of opposition is rigidly maintained. The electric pole measures the northern opposed distance limitations of the wave at trough and crest in points of wave altitudes which we shall call the overtones. The magnetic base measures the southern opposed area limitations of the wave which we shall call the harmonic circles. Thus are distance and area, the first two dimensions of motion, born of inertia. By connecting the overtones with every point of the harmonic circles, opposing cones are produced. Thus is volume, the third dimension of motion, born of inertia. Energy is simultaneously conceived in inertia and sequentially expressed in motion away from inertia. All dimensions of energy, both gravitational and radiational, are simultaneously marked off in inertia and sequentially transferred in expression to the wave which records sequences of motion. Thus is time, the fourth dimension of motion, born of inertia. By the expression of concept in opposing cones of generation and radiation, sex, the fifth dimension is born of inertia. Within the opposing cones, by reproduction through sex union exerted in sequence, and in opposing pressures and potentials, the sixth and seventh dimensions are born of inertia. Page 210 Page 211 By resistance to the opposing electro-magnetic flow temperature, the eighth dimension, is born of inertia. And so are all the dimensions born of inertia, by overcoming it and expressing their opposition in alternating oscillations. " And so, also, are all of the opposites of each dimension born of their relative positions in the opposing cones of energy. The nearer to the axis and to the apex of the cone the greater the density, temperature, pressure, potential, power-time and all effects of electro-positive preponderance. This is the direction of areas of increasingly high contraction pressure. The nearer the base of the cone the greater the tenuity, the speed-time and the tendency to ionize, and the lower the temperature, pressure, potential and all effects of electro-negative preponderance. This is the direction of areas of increasingly low expansion pressure. The equator of all mass is, therefore, the dividing plane between the opposing plus and minus pressures of the electro-magnetic forces. It is the plane where expansion pressure is preponderant in the maximum expansion of the mass. It is the plane of least density. The pole of…………. Unreadable lines….. maximum density and rigidity. All electro-positive actions are produced in all mass by contraction of the generative cones of energy toward the high contraction pressures of their poles of rotation. All electro-negative reactions are produced in all mass by expansion of the radiative cones of energy toward the high expansion pressures of their equators. This action and reaction of contraction and expansion supplies the electro-magnetic motor force for the construction of the little corpuscular pumps of which all mass is composed and by which its mechanics are co-ordinated. In the process of accumulation of little mass into big mass, the little pumps meld into one big pump, each working as a unit but all working for the whole. This is as true in the accumulation of mass into the form of man as into a planet. Big mass is but a multiplication of the power of little mass. The desire of electricity is to accumulate mass toward the north. The desire of magnetism is to dissipate mass toward the south. Electricity attempts the expression of its desire for action by opposing inertia and ends in non- motion of its speed-time dimension at the ultimate gravitative centers of all masses and systems. This effect is counterbalanced however, by its opposite effect of increased speed of revolution in power-time dimension. Magnetism attempts the expression of its desire to suppress motion through opposing it, and ends in expressing great motion at the equators and ecliptic areas of all masses and systems. This effect is, in its turn, also counterbalanced by its opposite effect of increased speed of revolution in power-time dimension. Electricity strives to simulate inertia by gyroscopic perfection of motion. The …………. Unreadable lines….. more stable is the gyroscopic ….revolution and the more illusively unstable its precessional progressions. Page 212 Magnetism, in seeking to suppress motion actually assists it by drawing the harmonic circles of its area dimension gradually into the plane of the electric north, thus creating a new south plane of zero latitude around the point of north at the overtone position of each wave. This plane is reflected at the equator of each mass of each wave. This new reflected image of the south inertial plane in mass or system will be called the ecliptic plane of mass or system. The ecliptic plane of mass or system revolves with revolving mass or system. The ecliptics of all elements between the in ertial harmonic circles and the overtones vary in their expansion and contraction according to their position and the relative expansion and contraction of the opposing cones of energy. At the overtones, the ecliptic is a plane born of the melding of both contours and bases in the plane of the melded apices of the opposing cones. From the overtones toward inertia, the ecliptics of all waves, systems and masses expand as the bases of the generative cones expand. The apparent relative ability of mass to attract and to repel is governed by the contraction of its polar magnetic bases and the expansion of its ecliptic. The greater the expansion of the ecliptic and the greater the diameters of precessional orbits, the less the ability of a mass to attract and to repel. .The less the expansion of the ecliptic, and the less the diameters of the precessional orbits, the greater the ability of a mass to attract and to repel. In any mass the diameters of its polar magnetic bases and of its axial precessional orbits increase as the mass recedes from, and decrease as it approaches its nucleal sun's equatorial plane. In any mass the expansion of its ecliptic, the diameters of its equatorial precessional orbits and of its polar magnetic bases increase as the mass recedes from, and decrease as it approaches its nucleal sun's equatorial plane. If these laws are well founded, the expansion of the ecliptic, the diameters of polar magnetic bases and the dimensions of precessional orbits must be related to the attraction of gravitation and the repulsion of radiation. Let us consider some familiar effects of the above principles in relation to this planet and solar system. Consider the great expansion of the ecliptic plane areas of the outer planets of low potential as compared to those of the inner ones of high potential. Consider the tenuity of the outer planets where the precessional orbits are extended, as compared to the density of the inner ones where the precessional orbit's are restricted. Consider the preponderance of centrifugal force which counteracts the gravitative power of the very much decomposed outer planets as compared to the preponderance of centripetal force which assists the inner planets in holding themselves together. Consider the outer planets' charging poles which are far removed from their poles of rotation, as compared to the inner planets' charging poles which are closer to their axial poles the nearer the planet is to the sun. The charging poles are wrongly termed "magnetic poles." Consider the slight attraction and repulsion power of the outer planets which float in extremely low pressure zones, as compared to the great attraction and repulsion power of the inner ones which float in high pressure zones. To remain as close to the sun as Mercury requires a potential approaching that of the sun itself. Page 213 Page 214 Consider the low melting and freezing points of the outer planets where our gases are their solids, as compared to the high melting points of the inner planets. To remain frozen as close to the sun as Mercury requires a pressure equilibrium approaching that of the sun itself. Let us now consider the charging poles in respect to their apparent relative ability to attract. It is commonly supposed that the north pole of a magnet is the positive pole, which attracts, and the south pole of a magnet is its negative pole, which repels. The apparent ability of the positive pole of a magnet to attract the negative, and the negative to attract the positive, has been one of the evidences which has built up the theory that opposite charges attract and like charges repel. Further deceptive evidence in support of this theory lies in the fact that the north positive pole of a "magnetized" bar of iron will appear to repel the north positive pole of a compass needle, and, on the contrary, the south negative pole of a "magnetized" bar of iron will appear to attract the north positive pole of a compass needle. The evidence that like charges repel is as convincing as that the moon keeps pace with moving man, or that the earth is flat. It is evidence that one can really see, like other illusions of motion. The truth is that north is the apex of a cone into which a super-normal electric stream is spirally flowing, due to electric excitation. The reason that the south pole of the bar of iron appears to attract the north pole of the compass needle is that the electric stream is flowing through both the iron and the needle in the same direction, from south to north. To expect them to do otherwise would be equivalent to expecting two water pipes, through which streams are flowing, to continue their flow as one stream if the water pipes were joined together in such a way that the streams were flowing in opposite directions. Just as the two separate streams of water would apparently repel each other if the pipes were so joined, so would they appear to attract each other and flow as one stream if the pipes were joined so that their streams were flowing in the same direction. One may demonstrate the truth of this by cutting a "magnetized" bar of iron anywhere between its opposite poles. It will then be seen that a new north and south pole will appear on each of the two separate bars. This process may be repeated indefinitely, always with the same result. The so-called "magnetized" bar of iron is one in which a strong electric inductive current has so greatly contracted the generative, and expanded the radiative cones of energy of the atoms of iron that their polar magnetic bases and their ecliptic expansions have been vastly reduced, and the speeds of their generative and radiative flows correspondingly increased. Atoms of iron not so treated, leap toward these faster flowing streams. The term "magnetized" was given to iron so treated because iron exposed to the magnetic field of a generative coil always causes this effect. The magnetic field of a generative coil is the radio-active emanation, or discharge, of an over- charged coil. It is the degeneration of a generating charge when it leaves the generative coil. In other words, it is the leakage or overflow from an overfilled receptacle. Not so however, when it impacts against the iron. It then becomes regenerated. The negative discharge becomes a positive charge. The iron bar becomes electrified, not magnetized. Page 215 The bar of iron, and the so-called magnetic poles of a revolving rotating mass, such as this planet, are two different effects. Every mass, such as this planet, is supposed to be a "magnet." It is, but not like the "magnetized" bar of iron, or the compass needle. It is a double "magnet." Its two charging poles meet head on at the gravitative center of the planet and the oppositely flowing electric streams meet there exactly as oppositely flowing streams of water would meet if water pipes were opposed as above described. In any mass when these two streams meet they oppose and spread against each other's force in the direction of the ecliptic plane area of the mass. It is commonly supposed that the "magnetic" pole of this planet is analogous to a bar magnet," being one continuous bar extending from the negative antarctic south to the positive arctic north. A compass needle, nearing the south "magnetic" pole, dips so violently that it seems desirous of plunging arrow-head-first directly into the sea. This apparently supports the theory that opposite poles attract, for here the north attrac tive positive pole of the compass is attracted to its south supposedly repellent negative pole. Carry this experiment farther and approach the north "magnetic" pole with the compass. Upon nearing it, the same effect is produced as that at the south pole.
