---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 14 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 14

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 14 of 15
**Words**: ~7,427
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

The ever changing cones of the wave, their ever changing axes and their ever changing magnetic bases, reflecting themselves in tonal inertial pressure walls and equatorial planes of evolving masses, give to the masses in motion all of their complexities of precessional orbits and variation of ecliptic planes. We are accustomed to think of the orbit of a planet as a continuous and repeative one of the same dimensions, instead of as a slowly expanding spiral the repeative revolutions of which so closely coincide that periods of thousands of years must elapse to mark a noticeable change. If the plane of this system were located as far toward the south in the cone of the wave as the 2+ potential position, orbital extension would be very noticeable in short spaces of time. Located as our solar system is, however, close to the apex of the positive cone of the wave, where the sun's speed is increasing in the universal ratio as it hurries into ever increasing pressures toward its point of north, the increased pressures of the ever increasing higher potential position, toward which the sun is dragging the whole system, practically offsets the extension of planetary orbits. The consequent gradual decrease of the zodiacal expansion also helps to offset orbital extension of planets. If revolution of mass is spiral all orbits must be conic sections. If the pressures within the cones of the wave were evenly distributed in horizontal directions, even though unevenly distributed in vertical directions, all orbits would be practically true circles. The bending of the cones of the wave results in such unequal horizontal distribution of pressures that the conic sections in which orbits lie are in planes which conform to the variation of pressures. The reason for the decelerated revolution of the outer planets of a system and the accelerated revolution of the inner ones is very simple. Outer planets revolve in orbits farther south and inner planets revolve in orbits farther north. Magnetic deceleration of revolution is toward the south magnetic bases of the cones of waves. Electric acceleration of revolution is toward the north apices of the cones of waves. In a high potential position an orbit is very much restricted, a mass is very much contracted, and its weight, specific gravity and density are very high. Page 281 In this potential condition it occupies a position very close to the gravitative-radiative center of its system. A mass in a high potential position must cover an equal orbital area in the same amount of time as would the same mass in the same plane expanded to a low potential position. The high potential must therefore circle its sun four times to the one revolution of an equal mass in the same plane but twice the distance from its sun. The accelerated or decelerated revolution of any part of an orbit is due to its eccentricity. Every equal area of the orbit of any mass must be covered in an equal interval of time. Kepler's well known second law of motion reads as follows: "The radius vector of each planet describes equal areas in equal times," or "the straight line joining a planet to the sun sweeps out equal areas in equal intervals of time." The orbit of Mercury is the most eccentric of the system. Consequently, there is a greater relative acceleration as the planet approaches its perihelion and greater relative deceleration as it approaches its aphelion than of any other planet in this system. Among the comets where eccentricity is very great, the acceleration of the comet as it approaches the sun and its aphelion position of maximum deceleration might be likened unto the speed of the antelope as compared with that of the tortoise. ECCENTRICITY OF ORBIT Why Mercury should swing around the sun in so great an ellipse, why the orbit of Venus is so nearly perfect a circle and why there should be a variation of eccentricity among the planets can be easily explained. It will be remembered that all mass moving on the outward journey to north is generative, and that all generative mass is accelerative in its orbit. All orbits are conic sections. A conic section which is parallel to its base is a circle. A conic section which is slightly inclined to its base is an ellipse of very little eccentricity. The greater the inclination of any conic section to the base of the cone, the greater the eccentricity of an orbit. It will be remembered that the apex of the cone of energy is the point of north. An elliptical conic section has upon its surface two points, one of which is nearest to north and the other of which is farthest from north. The point nearest to north is not only nearer to the moving apex of the cone of energy, which is also the line of the wave, but it is also nearer to the bending axis of the cone. The point nearest to south is not only farther away from the moving apex of the cone of energy but it is also farther away from the bending axis of the cone. That section of an eccentric orbit which lies above a circular conic section is the north-east section of an orbit. Conversely, that section which lies below a circular conic section is the south-west section. If the north-east section of an eccentric orbit is that part of the orbit in which the perihelion is located and if acceleration of an orbit always increases toward its perihelion, then the northeast section of the orbit and its perihelion must in some manner be related to the relative ability of a mass to appear to attract. Page 282 Page 283 If the south-west section of an eccentric orbit is that part of the orbit in which the aphelion is located, and if deceleration of an orbit always increases toward its aphelion, then the south-west section of the orbit and its aphelion must in some' manner be related to the relative ability of a mass to appear to repel. The acceleration of attraction is always toward the perihelion of an orbit and the deceleratio of n repulsion is always toward its aphelion. In any mass the aphelion of every orbit is the point of maximum exhalation and the beginning of inhalation. In any mass the perihelion of every orbit is the point of maximum inhalation and the beginning of exhalation. The interval of time between one exhalation-inhalation of any mass is the standard unit year of that mass. The inhalation impulse of any mass is endothermic, generative, and centripetal. The exhalation impulse of any mass is exothermic, radiative and centrifugal. If the perihelion of an eccentric orbit is that part which is preponderantly heat absorbing and generative, it must necessarily follow that the mass which is travelling toward the perihelion of its orbit is increasingly electropositive. If the aphelion of an eccentric orbit is that part which is heat discharging and radiative, it must necessarily follow that the mass which is travelling toward the aphelion of its orbit is increasingly electronegative. If the charging and discharging of the northeast section of an orbit is in excess of that of the south-west section, it must necessarily follow that the variation in plane which makes an eccentric orbit possible is related to the attraction of gravitation and the repulsion of radiation. Page 284 Page 285 CONTENTS CHAPTER XXIII EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION CRYSTALLIZATION-THE TENTH DIMENSION All matter is crystallic. Crystals are the record in form of the state of motion of the potential which produced that form. Solids of matter are but accumulated potential, so therefore all mass is an accumulation of crystals of varying forms. The variation of crystallic form is due to the variation of potential. As matter is but light transformed from speed-time dimension in plane to power-time dimension in mass against resistance which is registered in heat, so are crystals the reaction record of that transformation which is registered in cold. As light accumulates the one substance by the attraction of its generative motion and melts it into the idea of form according to the dimension of its potential position, so does the reaction of that action freeze it into the appearance of the form which belongs to its potential position. Crystals are records in form of potential position attained by the action of generation. Generative action melts. Radiative reaction freezes. The melting point of any element depends upon its potential position, its pressure environment. Nature, in her economy of energy, prevents waste of her effort of generation by freezing that effort into the record of the position it has attained. Crystals are the frozen records in form of the genero-active effort of accumulating potential. All potential positions are tonal. All form is tonal. All crystallic forms are records of tonal periodicities. As all accumulating mass is aiming toward perfection in the simple form of the sphere, so the separate tones which constitute accumulating mass are aiming toward perfection in the simple form of the cube. True cubic crystallization can only take place at the overtone position of the wave in the cubes of motion. The journey from plane to mass is recorded by the locking of the successive efforts of energy developed in the attempt to reach that position into the formation of crystals. As the journey from plane to mass is in the direction of resistance which is indicated endo- thermically in temperature dimension by greater heat absorption, so is the resistance to mass formation indicated by crystals in a tonal periodicity ranging from softness to hardness. So also this resistance to mass integration is registered crystallically in a tonal periodicity of form ranging from amorphous complexity to cube simplicity. So also the return journey to plane is registered by a reversal of these tonal. periodicities. As the resistance to mass formation is registered in each of the eighteen dimensions by equal and opposite positive and negative plus and minus tonal matter, and as crystalli7ption is one of those eighteen dimensions, it therefore follows that variation of density of crystallic form is as complex as variation of potential is complex. A volume for this subject alone is necessary. These chapters must necessarily be limited to the emphasizing of the one purpose for which these groups of chapters have been written, namely, of Page 286 demonstrating that the power of mass to attract is as variable as its power to generate light pulsations into appearance as accumulated potential; also that the power of mass to repel is as variable as its power to degenerate light pulsations into disappearance as discharged potential. The journey from the soft, amorphous, complex crystal to the hard simple one is a centripetal one in which the intended accumulation starts toward its ultimate vortex from many directions and in many planes which register the amorphous violet of red-blue in color, and ends in one direction and one plane which registers yellow in color. The return journey back to, softness from hardness starts from the bisexuality of a one plane position, arrives at the base of the female cone of energy divided in many directions and registers in the violet of blue-red in color. If it is true that the attraction of gravitation and the repulsion of radiation are sufficiently variable to cause great differences in hardness of crystallization and also great differences in form, according to the potential position of the crystallizing mass, the tenth dimension must be taken into account in writing the laws of gravitation and radiation. __________________________ Page 287 CONTENTS CHAPTER XXIV EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION PLANE AND ECLIPTIC—THE SIXTEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH DIMENSIONS Plane and ecliptic are two of the most important dimensions. Each is worthy of a volume in itself. This chapter, therefore, will deal briefly with these dimensions, as this series of chapters is written primarily for the purpose of showing the relation of all dimension of mass to the phenomena of gravitation and radiation. The outward journey from plane to mass and back again to plane is a journey into appearance from inertia of non-dimension to the inertial bi-sexual position of formed mass at 4t and back again to disappearance in inertia of non-dimension. The dimensionless universe knows neither plane nor mass. The universe of dimension knows infinite variety of both plane and mass. In the evolution of mass from the inertial plane of the concept of mass, plane evolves in orderly periodicity as mass evolves. It has heretofore been written that the conquest of either opposite in any expression of force by the other is always accomplished by a simulation of the attributes of the one conquered. Mass overcomes the concept of plane in the non-dimensional universe of inertia, by simulating plane in an objective universe of motion. When motion begins the process of overcoming inertia, the plane of forming mass is infinitely complex. When motion has completely overcome inertia to the full extent of the energy of any particular action, the plane of formed mass is infinitely simple. It is then in one plane, the plane of the equator of each mass in a system. (See page 141.) During the evolution of plane from the complexity of many directions to the simplicity of one, the forming corpuscles of systems revolve in many orbits but change their positions until they eventually revolve in one plane. When the one plane is reached in formed mass the genero-active action has reached its maximum. Radio-active reaction then preponderates. It has been heretofore written that mass attains an appearance of stability through motion and retains that appearance only by a continuation of motion. All expressions of energy are represented by varying stages of evolution each of which is registered in each dimension. When the maximum of any expression of energy is reached at the overtone position of the wave, the one simple unstable plane of motion begins its complexing into many planes. The open complex condition of forming mass in the nebulous, shapeless state is that in which the area of variation in plane approximates 90 degrees to the equatorial plane of maximum motion, at which position mass appears and disappears as form. The closed and simple condition of formed mass in the solid, spherical state is that in which there is no area of variation in the ecliptic or equatorial plane- which marks the limitations of the expression of energy which fathered any particular mass. Page 288 It has elsewhere been explained that the opposing cones of energy disappear by expansion into equatorial planes and by contraction into poles of rotation. As these cones contract and expand, all parts of each system revolve around a forming nucleus in the gradually lessening and increasing expansion of plane area. This expansion which differs in all systems in orderly periodicities, is exemplified in our solar system in that effect which we call the zodiacal area. In our solar system the area of plane expansion of the ecliptic for major masses within the system is approximately eight degrees -on either side of the solar equatorial plane. All major masses within our system must continue their journeys within this area. Beyond this area only those very much smaller masses, such as asteroids and comets are permitted to extend their ecliptic planes, and expand their plane areas, toward their disappearance. These smaller masses and comets might be likened to the insignificant leakage of rare gases through even well fitting piston rings in an engine. Their potential is too low to keep them within the defined area and the comets are so lacking in density that their ability to regenerate and contract from hundreds of thousands of miles in diameter at their aphelions, to an hundred miles at their perihelions makes of them nomad wanderers throughout great expanses of our swirling solar, hurricane. In their continued search for true potential positions for the rapidly changing potentials of these expanded masses their alternate inhalations and exhalations are like the gaspings of a dying man. Generative inhalations greatly contract the volumes of highly expanded mass of low potentials and radiative exhalations greatly expand them. This accounts for the tremendously eccentric orbits of the comets and the expanded ecliptic areas of such small masses as the asteroids. All mass is but a reflection of its concept. Mass is conceived in inertia and reflected as the matured image of its concept at an angle of 90 degrees to the plane of concept. The immatured or "growing" image of concept is recorded in plane at angles which vary from the beginning of mass formation in the inertial plane of non-dimension in concept, to the completion of mass formation in the inertial plane of maximum dimension in mass which is at the equator of mass. Just as the idea of man is reflected as the image of man on the plane of the water's surface at a 90 degree angle from the object reflected, so are the matured concepts of universal idea reflected in the universe of maximum dimension which lies at an angle of 90 degrees to the universe of non-dimension. Growth is idea evolving in transit to its maturing point in a reflecting plane at the equator of mass and devolving back again to inertia. All mass is a reflection of the concept of that mass. The greater the angle of the reflecting plane of forming mass to the plane of concept in inertia, the greater the positive charge and negative discharge of that mass and consequently the greater its ability to appear to attract and to repel. Preponderance of power of mass to appear to attract increases as the reflecting plane progresses through the tonal positions of 1 + 2 + and 3 + to its maximum at 4++. Preponderance of power of mass to appear to repel increases as the reflecting plane progresses through the tonal "positions of 1 — 2 — and 3 — to its maximum at 4++. The elements of matter and all expressions of energy in combination are states of motion of varying potentials which represent various stages of progress toward and beyond maturity, the reflection of concept. Page 289 Each potential has its own evolving, evolved or devolving plane position in its wave. Each plane is but a registration in wave position of a potential, just as a tone, color, temperature or any other dimension is a registration of a state of motion. Just as locked potentials of high positive charge and high melting points, in which the dominating spectrum lines are in the orange and yellow, have a greater power to attract than locked potentials of lower positive charge and lower melting points, in which the dominating spectrum lines are in the infra red and red, so have locked potentials of 70° + to 90° ++ in plane greater power to attract than those which register 1° + to 70° +. Conversely, just as locked potentials of high negative discharge and high melting points, in which the dominating spectrum lines are in the green and green-blue, have a greater power to repel than the elements of lower negative discharge and lower melting points, in which the dominating spectrum lines are in the ultra violet and blue, so have locked potentials of 70° — to 90° ++ greater power to repel than those which register 1° — to 70° — If elements of great angle of plane and little expansion of plane area in their octave waves have a greater power to appear to attract or repel than elements of little angle of plane and great expansion of plane area, then it must necessarily follow that the power of mass to attract or repel is partly conditioned by the relation of the plane position of the mass, and not alone by distance and the product of attracting masses. If this is true, then plane of increasing angle and lessening expansion of plane area in the positive half of the wave must in some manner be related to the power of mass to appear to attract. Conversely, plane of increasing angle and lessening expansion of plane area in the negative half of the wave must in some manner be related to the power of mass to appear to repel. If these premises are well founded the sixteenth dimension must be considered in the writing of the laws of gravitation and radiation. The greater the expansion of the ecliptic plane area of forming mass the less the positive charge and negative discharge of that mass and consequently the less its ability to appear to attract and repel. Preponderance of power of mass to appear to attract and to repel increases as expansion of ecliptic plane area decreases. As the ecliptic plane area contracts to a spiral in one plane in the direction of the carbon line on the positive half of the wave, the elements within that half of the wave have an ever increasing power to appear to attract: Conversely, as expansion of the ecliptic plane area increases from the carbon line to the line of the inert gases, the power of the elements within this negative half of the wave to appear to repel decreases. The more restricted the expansion of the ecliptic plane area, the higher the potential. Conversely, the greater the expansion of the ecliptic plane area, the lower the potential. Time is necessary for registering the evolution and devolution of plane as it journeys from its conceptual stage in the universal white light of Mind substance to its matured reflection in the simulated white light of the simulated substance, and beyond to the melding point of simulation and reality in the white light of universal Mind in inertia. Comprehension of this process will clarify the mystery of growth from infancy to maturity and beyond to "death" where life eternal is and begins again in endless repeative sequences in time, space and motion. If these premises are true then elements of contracting ecliptic plane areas which belong to the charging positive half of their respective octave waves must in some manner be related to the power of mass to appear to attract. Page 290 Conversely, the elements of expanding ecliptic plane areas which belong to the discharging negative half of their respective octave waves must in some manner be related to the power of mass to appear to repel. If these premises are well founded the eighteenth dimension must be considered in the writing of the laws of gravitation and radiation. ____________________ Page 291 CONTENTS CHAPTER XXV EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION IONIZATION—THE NINTH DIMENSION All mass is an aggregation of light units assembled into systems and into systems of systems. All mass is held together by internal surface tension pressure generated by itself. Any mass of high pressure and ,potential which is brought into a zone of low. pressure and potential will rapidly lose the light units of which it is composed. An environment of extreme low pressure and potential surrounding a mass of high pressure and potential will reduce the ability of that mass to generate internal surface tension pressure. Under such conditions a mass of high potential will expand, thus separating its particles. They will fly away from their mass with more or less violence according to the consequential reduction in internal surface tension pressure. This effect is the attempt of nature to maintain an equilibrium. High potential out of place must adjust itself to the place in which it finds itself. This separation of particles is the radiative process due to the electro-magnetic power of repulsion. It will be recalled that bodies receding from each other discharge each other. It will be recalled that discharging bodies discharge their high potential into lower potential and thus redistribute accumulated mass. It must not be forgotten, however, that a discharging body is merely preponderant in its ability to discharge. It is also a charging body in a lesser degree. Discharging bodies while discharging their high potential are simultaneously accumulating high potential from lower potential by the centripetal force of generation. Any mass of low pressure and potential which is brought into a zone of high pressure and potential will lose the light units of which it is composed more slowly in its new potential position. The mass will contract, thus drawing its light units and systems closer together. This contraction of particles is the generative process of attraction. It will be recalled that bodies approaching each other charge each other. Charging bodies of higher potential regenerate discharging bodies of lower potential. This is the process of accumulation of mass. Accumulating mass being preponderantly gravitative increases its internal surface tension pressure as it accumulates and thus loses less of its particles. This universe of dimension expressed by motion is a corpuscular universe of varying pressures. The corpuscles which constitute the appearance of form are little pumps which pump themselves into closer proximity to other corpuscles when they are generatively strong and pump themselves away from other corpuscles when their generative ability relaxes. When generative corpuscles pump themselves together in a cohesive mass they retain that position by the high pressures which their many pumps have generated. All of the corpuscles of the One substance pump themselves into the various states of potential which we call the elements of matter. Page 292 Page 293 Chemists call these little corpuscular pumps ions. When chemists subject any substance to the strain of a potential so far removed from the correct potential position that its surface ions cannot stand the suction, the surface ions lose their hold and fly away. Chemists call this effect "ionization." Let us assume for example that a piece of silver (803 — D) is subjected to the suction of a very low potential such as nitric acid. The piece of silver would gradually disappear. Its surface ions would fly away with explosive violence, thus raising the lower surrounding potential. As the nitric acid charges by impact with and absorption of the silver ionic discharge, the process of ionization diminishes. If there is enough nitric acid to completely ionize the silver the silver ions will expand into disappearance as a cohesive solid. In this event the generative ability of the mass of silver has been entirely overcome by the unwinding power of centrifugal force which has thus been placed in control. If a piece of any metal which is of a lower potential than silver, copper for example, is inserted into this solution, the silver will reappear and the copper will disappear. The reason for this is very simple. Copper ions, being of lower potential than silver ions, have less ability than silver to hold themselves in the position of a cohesive solid. They therefore succumb more easily to the expanding power of the lower potential. The strain of resistance against the unwinding power of centrifugal force is thus removed from the silver ions and allows them to reform into their crystallic position, but not as a solid lump of silver. A solid substance when ionized by being subjected to a lower potential position, even if regenerated, will not come together again as a solid while in a lower potential position. To reform as a solid mass of silver with the same internal surface pressure and the same power of cohesion, the crystals would have to be resubjected to the pressure of the high potential which caused the original density. This could only be done by bringing the crystals to their melting point and allowing them to reintegrate their systems under such a pressure. A metal of low potential, such as sodium, will ionize with violence in water, but a metal of high potential, such as aluminum or nickel, will hardly be affected by water. Ionization is a disintegration process just as radioactivity is a disintegration process. Both of these effects of motion are the attempts of nature to redistribute accumulated high potential into lower potential. This planet, for example, while generating energy from the sun and the inner planets Mercury and Venus, is also discharging radioactive emanations in the direction of the planet Mars along the increasingly tangential pressure lanes of the system. It is proper to define this discharge of potential from the planet which is approximately in its proper potential position as a radioactive effect, for it is normally discharging that which it is normally generating. If, however, some giant hand should remove the earth far away from its potential position into the low pressure position occupied by Saturn, for example, the earth (assuming for the moment that it did Page 294 not explode) would discharge its potential so furiously that the process would then be termed "ionization." It would be losing its particles in such clouds that it would be quite analogous to that of a piece of soft metal suspended in a strong acid solution. A good example of what would take place under such conditions is seen in the comets which leave vast trails of ionized Material in their wake or push them ahead of them according to whether their direction is toward or away from the sun. The trail of the emanations from a comet cannot properly be called radio-active emanations because the process is more nearly analogous to the chemical reaction which we call ionization. Ionization, therefore, can be understood as that process in which a high potential is placed in an environment of very much lower potential and thus more quickly subjected to disintegration. The process of ionization is a quick and abnormal return to disappearance in plane in the return journey to the southerly zone of expansion. Ionization is an abnormal replacement of that which electricity has displaced. Radio-activity on the other hand is a normal replacement of that which electricity is genero-actively displacing. All substance is radio-active. All substance is emitting ions. A normal outflow of radio-active emanations in accordance with a normal ability to generate ions could be termed a radio-active effect. A piece of radium for example, is generating higher pressures by pumping the ions of lower potential into its centripetal vortices. In a lesser degree it is ejecting ions, centrifugally hurling them away from its vortices at a speed approximating 180,000 miles per second. It is possible for radium to generate and emit its generated ions in the form of incandescent projectiles of inert gases in the potential position occupied by it on this planet. If this piece of radium were in the position occupied by Venus or Mercury, both its genero-activity and its radio-activity would be increased a thousand fold bemuse of the environment of its high potential position. On the contrary, if this piece of radium were in the position occupied by Neptune it would disintegrate by ionization to such an expanded volume that both its genera-active and radioactive powers would be correspondingly reduced. The accompanying chart explains the relative ability of mass to hold itself together through cohesion and to tear itself apart through the release of surface tension pressure according to the law of the formula of the locked potentials. As in all forming mass ionization decreases in the inverse of the universal ratio and in the order of the formula of the locked potentials as …………..missing words in scan……….in direct ratio as the mass expands toward south. All effects of ionization, all genero-active and all radio-active effects are governed by the four pressure laws here repeated: The greater the positive charge the greater the pressure of contraction. The greater the pressure of contraction the less the volume. The greater the negative discharge the greater the pressure of expansion. The greater the pressure of expansion the less the volume. If substance disintegrates through the process of ionization and radio-active emanations, then these two processes used by nature for the replacement of material collected for the building of her ideas, must in some manner be related to the power of repulsion. Page 295 Page 296 If separate substances under differing conditions have a relative power of disintegration through ionization or radio-active emanations, then the power of repulsion must be relative. If the power of repulsion is relative and according to the potential of the substance and its potential position, then must these effects of the ninth dimension of motion be taken into consideration in the writing of the laws of gravitation and radiation. Page 297 CONTENTS CHAPTER XXVI EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION VALENCY—THE ELEVENTH DIMENSION Valency is one of the great dimensions by means of which states of motion can be measured in their relative tonal pressure intensities. The term "valence" is a standard unit of tonal relations just as a day is a standard unit of the periods of rotation, or as a year is a standard unit of the periods of revolution. Valency is a measurement employed by chemists to classify the various elemental tones in relation to their relative willingness, or unwillingness, to unite with each other. Chemists have found that some of the elements will consent to unite with some other elements only with persuasion while they are very desirous of uniting with certain others. They have found, for example, that one sodium atom (1+) will unite willingly with one chlorine atom (1— ). The valency of these two elements, the first being a positive action and the second being an equal negative reaction, are both said to have a valency of one. A sodium atom (1+) will unite less willingly with a sulphur atom (2 —) which has a valency of two. An increasing unwillingness to unite with sodium is found in the phosphorous atom (3 —) which has a valency of three. Carbon (4++) has to be forced under great pressure to unite with any element of a valency of one and in each case the number of atoms have to be equalized to correspond to the valency. Carbon (4++), for example, demands four atoms of hydrogen (1+) and the high temperature pressure of the arc light, to induce union. It is self-evident, therefore, from the chemist's practical experience that the elements have not equal powers of attraction for each other, mass for mass, or volume for volume. If the laws of gravitation as at present understood were faultless, valency in the elements would be inconceivable. If the ability of one mass to attract another were conditioned only by relative distance and the product of their masses, then equal masses of hydrogen (1+) and oxygen (2 —) would attract each other as readily as an equal mass of hydrogen (1+) and fluorine (1.—). This is not the case, however, for a double quantity of hydrogen and an abnormal pressure must be used to induce union with oxygen. On the contrary, hydrogen and fluorine will leap together with explosive violence in ordinary temperatures. It is an accepted fact that any positive and negative elements of equal valence will unite much more readily than either of these elements will unite with an element of higher valency. If this is true then the present accepted laws of gravitation cannot be true. It will be observed that the valency of all of the elements is in accordance with the formula of the locked potentials. The inert gases have zero valency for they will not unite with any other element, although they will unite very readily with each other, not as compounds, but as interlocking substances. The inert gases of lower potentials integrate within the inert gases of higher potentials. Page 298 All elements of the lithium line have a positive valence of one. Their preponderance of power to attract is in the relation of one-eighth of the energy of their respective octave waves. All elements of the berilium line have a valence of two. Their preponderance of power to attract is in the relation of two-eighths of the energy of their respective octave waves. All elements of the boron line have a positive valence of three. Their preponderance of power to attract is in the relation of three-eighths of the energy of their respective octave waves. All elements of the carbon line have a positive-negative, or bisexual valence of four: Their approximately equal power to attract and to repel is in the relation of four to three, four to two and four to one of the energy of the other elements in their respective octave waves. All elements in the nitrogen line have a negative valence of three. Their preponderance of power to repel is in the relation of three-eighths of the energy of their respective octave waves. All elements in the oxygen line have a negative valence of two. Their preponderance of power to repel is in the relation of two-eighths of the energy of their respective octave 'Waves. The elements in the fluorine line have a negative valence of one. Their preponderance of power to repel is in the relation of one-eighth of the energy of their respective octave waves. The mid-tones have a fluctuating valence but it must be borne in mind that the mid-tones are split tones and the greater the number of mid-tones and the greater their total of valence, the more the over- tone of their wave is affected by subtraction Of positive charge and negative discharge. Carbon is the only over-tone of truly equal positive and negative valence. All other elements in the carbon line are either negatively or positively preponderant. In adopting standard units of valency measurements, the physicists have based their calculations from the element hydrogen as the unit of one. This is akin to adopting one note on the keyboard of a piano as a key for every octave scale whether it is for the key of one flat, three flats or five sharps. the As in musical tones each octave has its keynote which is a definite tonal relation to the entire octave, so in chemistry each octave of the elements has its own keynote. Hydrogen (401 -1-) should be adopted as the unit of valency measurement of the fourth octave only. Lithium (501 +) for the fifth octave, sodium (601 -I-) for the sixth octave, potassium (701-1-) for the seventh octave, rubidium (801 +) for the eighth octave, caesium (901-1-) for the ninth octave and the unknown element (1001+) preceding radium for the tenth octave. When the standard units of valency measurements are changed to conform with true tonal relations valency can be more accurately calculated, but while one element is forced to stand as a unit constant or keynote for all of the tones of every octave the miscalculations of valency will be as disproportionate as similar tonal calculations on a keyboard would be inharmonious. If it is true that elements of different valencies have a different power to appear to attract and to repel, then valency, the eleventh dimension, must be taken into consideration in the writing of the laws of gravitation and radiation. Page 299 CONTENTS CHAPTER XXVII EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION TONE—THE SEVENTEENTH DIMENSION Tone, in the sense in which we understand the meaning of the word sound, is one of the great dimensions. Tone is registered in sound as it is in color, plane, temperature and other dimensions. Every expression of energy has its own particular tonal sound just as it has its own color plane or degree of temperature. Sound is generally conceived to be the result of a concussion taking place in the air. The "ether of space" is generally conceived to be soundless. This concept is not in accord with the laws of motion. Sound is from the beginning and from the very first octave. It matters not how low or how high the potential, every active and reactive oscillation is accompanied by sound. Sound increases in resonance as potential accumulates. Both effects of motion are due to the same cause, the generation of accumulated energy from the first to the tenth octaves and its radiation into inertia. All states of motion register themselves tonally in the opposites of sound in the same periodicity as they register themselves in the other dimensions. All sound is caused by potential impacting against potential or separating from potential. All sound is the result of explosions of accumulating or redistributing energy. Every generative action and every radiative reaction is an explosion. All explosions are either genero-active or radio-active. Genero-active explosions are those in which two opposing potentials seek each other with violence. Such explosions are gravitative. They are born of centripetal force and they are due to the power of matter to appear to attract. Genero-active explosions draw corpuscles into forming mass. These are the explosions by means of which mass is accumulated. Genero-active explosions are endothermic or heat absorbing. Radio-active explosions are those in which high potential discharges into lower potential with violence. Such explosions are radiative. They are born of centrifugal force and they are due to the power of matter to appear to repel. Radio-active explosions eject corpuscular emanations from mass. These are the explosions of expanding mass by means of which accumulated mass is redistributed. Radio-active explosions are exothermic or heat expelling. Genero-active explosions are caused by the desire of positive charge to accumulate as mass. Radioactive explosions are caused by the desire of negative discharge to redistribute accumulated masses of stored energy into a state of inertia. Genero-active and radio-active explosions in sequence are analogous to the intake and exhaust of a pump. Page 300 The preponderance of one or the other is the condition precedent to mass formation or mass dissolution. The alternating explosive oscillations which simultaneously integrate and disintegrate evolving and devolving mass cause sounds of greater or less intensity according to the potential position of the actions and reactions which cause those sounds. Just as all motion is expressed in waves so are all waves registered in their various dimensions. All states of motion are measurable as dimensions. Sound is a dimension. Sound being a dimension is, therefore, measurable. Explosions in the low potential position of the first six octaves are registered in the elements as full tones. Each full tone of sound is a whirlpool formed around a central nucleus, or vortex, toward which the generative energy induced by the effect of the explosion rushes with increasing violence, and away from which the reaction to that explosion rushes with decreasing violence. When energy accumulates to the high potential positions of the sixth and seventh octaves, the tonal explosions take place as full tones from the 0 = position in inertia to the 3 + and 3 — positions in their octave waves. At these points the accumulation- of genera active and radio-active force is so great that five mid- tonal vortices are formed between those positions and the over-tone of the wave. These mid-tonal vortices are the bases for ten new elements to each octave, five of which are positive and the other five negative. In the still higher potential positions of the eighth, ninth, and tenth octaves many mo mid-tonal re vortices appear which form the bases of many more elements, half of which in each octave are positive and half negative. Sound emanates from the explosions of every potential no matter how low or how high. More than this, the sound from either genero-active or radio-active explosions, register themselves in every octave both higher and lower than the octave of source. For a familiar example let us consider the sound of the human voice which is a genero-active explosion because of the fact that it is a higher potential generated out of a lower. The series of explosions which give birth to this sound becomes radio-active in the lower octaves and redistributes that accumulated energy into the lower potentials against which it impacts in that state of potential which we would term the air. The sound radiates slowly but its discharge into the potential of the lower octaves will travel around the planet several times while the same sound travels across the valley through the air. On the contrary, its impact against a cliff will retard its progress in the higher potentials of higher octaves but the sound continues to the end of the cycle. The cliff side undergoes an increase in positive charge because of the impact of energy against it. Just as we can hear the explosions of genero-active energy through the senses of hearing by impact of that energy against our ear drums, so can the explosions of low potential be reproduced with delicate instruments so that their regeneration into higher octaves would make them discernible to our sense of hearing.
