---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 15 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 15

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 15 of 15
**Words**: ~7,207
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

The bombardment of radio-active emanations can even now be amplified so that they can be heard. Master mechanics must devise instruments so delicate that low potential explosions. may be amplified and measured with as great accuracy as they have devised instruments for recording even a millionth degree of temperature. Page 301 It must be remembered that all explosions travel both ways, up and down the octaves, for there can be no action without a corresponding reaction nor can there be a reaction of an action without a repetition of both. This is a universe of reproduction and any effect of motion runs the entire gamut of all effects of motion. The force of that which is running away from inertia is equal to the speed of that which is returning to inertia. The speed of one is very great and its force very little. On the contrary the force of the other is very great and its speed very little. For the purposes of comparing the variable relation of tone to the attraction of gravitation and the repulsion of radiation it is only necessary to point out the different speeds at which any sound reproduces itself according to the potential in which the sound finds itself. Just as high potential discharges into low with ever increasing speed of reproduction, so does sound raise its tone and increase its reproductive speed. It also decreases its wave dimensions as potential powers. Just as nature's mechanical principles do not permit a waste of energy by allowing the discharge of any accumulated energy to be used without repeated regeneration, so must that gradual and sequential discharge and recharge be registered in ever lessening sound intensity and with ever increasing speed as power diminishes. In any mass the lower the octave the higher the potential and the slower the speed of reproduction of any effect of motion. In any mass the higher the octave the lower the potential and the greater the speed of reproduction of any effect of motion. In any mass the lower the octave the greater the wave dimension and the lower its tonal registration in sound. In any mass the higher the octave the smaller the wave dimension and the higher its tonal registration in sound. Low potential radio-active explosions can be amplified and regenerated to genero-active ones of electropositive force. When measurements of tonal positions are made possible and correlated to plane, color, temperature and other dimensions, a higher and more complex chemical analysis than that of to-day will be made possible. The simple, modern chemical analysis of a grain of wheat will not allow a synthesis which will enable one to produce the same substance. The more complex chemical analysis of all of the dimensions which enter into that grain of wheat will make it possible to reproduce exactly that substance even to the retaining all of its attributes. If the premises above stated are sound and the facts are true, it must necessarily follow that the states of motion which produce genero-active and radio-active explosions must in some manner be related to the power of matter to appear to attract and repel. If varying potentials have varying power to appear to attract or repel, the force which we call repulsion must necessarily be a variable and relative force. The variability and relativity of this force must be dependable upon the relative potential position of that force. If these premises are well founded then the seventeenth dimension must be taken into consideration in the writing of the laws of gravitation and radiation. It must necessarily follow that the attributes of attraction and repulsion which seem to belong to matter are merely illusions in respect to matter for they belong to motion only. Page 302 Page 303 CONTENTS The purport of these writings is to illumine the road leading to eternal life by knowledge of the journey through illusion and back again to reality, taken by man in his repeated adventures in time, space and motion. In order to illumine the way it is first necessary to trace the simulations, reflections and illusions of the apparently many substances, forms and things back to their base in the reality of the One thing. In attempting to do so it has been possible in this one volume to touch the very fundamentals but lightly in order to correct existing misconcepts. Even though later volumes will consider the very many effects of motion in great detail, the basic principle of the one cause of the many effects will not be enlarged upon. It cannot be enlarged upon. This brief concluding chapter is written to draw from all that has heretofore been written the one lesson that all that man calls "the created universe" is but an illusion of the forms of ideas thought out by Mind. Ideas, and their expression in form have no existences whatsoever. They are unreal. They are but images conjured up by the image making faculty of Mind in the ecstasy of thinking. Their appearance of existence is due solely to motion and limited to the effects of motion. Increase motion-in-opposition and every effect of the illusion intensifies to its limitation in the simulation in non-motion-in-opposition of the universal white light of Mind. Decrease motion-in-opposition and every effect of the illusion nebulizes and eventually disappears into the white light of non-motion-in-inertia. Every idea is constantly changing. Every effect of motion is constantly changing. Changing things can have no existence. On the contrary, all that man calls the undependable unreality of the unseen universe, is in fact the only reality. Mind is the only real thing in the universe and Mind is all that is. Mind is the only substance in the universe. There is no other substance. Thinking Mind is the only living thing in the universe. The thinking of Mind is the life principle of the One substance. Thinking Mind evolves ideas and registers them in form through motion. Man's physical universe of solids of matter is an aggregation of the forms of ideas thought out by Mind and held in suspense for a time. If these premises are well founded one can more intelligently answer the supreme question "What is God?" Page 304 If there is but One substance, One Being, One Mind, One force, and that One is the only existing reality, must not that One be that which we term God? If all that which we know as form is but the changing illusion of the image making faculty of thinking Mind, then God must be formless and unchanging. If there is but One Mind and man is admittedly Mind, then is not the form of man unreal and the real man formless? If the real man is formless and the image of man is but an illusion of his thinking, is not that illusion of man self creating? And is man not also God? And are not all things also God? Are not all things the One thing, thinking out the several ideas of the One real thing in the appearance of many unreal things? Is not that which we call "heaven" but an image of man's thinking. If the statement herein made that form has no existence, and that nothing in this universe has time, place or position, is in accord with the laws of motion herein formulated then it must follow that man's "heaven" and "hell" must be illusions. If such places exist they must be somewhere IN the universe. They cannot be extraneous to it. If they exist within the universe their existence must have dimension. If they are dimensionable they must be subject to the laws of changing things. There is no "part" of the universe which enjoys the special privilege of immunity from the laws of gravitation and radiation. Man's "heaven" and "hell" are but illogical concepts of the outer mind. The inner Mind rejects such unwholesome imaginings. They are traditions, inherited from an age of superstition, of ignorance of nature's laws, of fear, of belief in an avenging God, and of an attitude of mind which demanded the miraculous as a deific qualification. Man is self creative as all idea of Mind is self creative. That which we call "self" is but the changing form of idea thought out by the unchanging formless One. Individuality, therefore, is non-existent except as it appears to exist in things of changing form. If individuality is only an effect of more or less sustained motion and ceases with cessation of motion then individuality disappears with form at the passing point of absolute inertia in the cycle of motion. If individuality and form is an idea only and sustained in the appearance of existence by the electromagnetic force of thinking, then that which man calls God cannot have form nor can the attribute of individuality be attributed to Him. God must be, can only be, universal. If God is universal then all else is universal. If God is omnipresent, omnipotent and omniscient then all the universe is omnipresent, omnipotent and omniscient. When man learns that God is Mind, that Mind is the One living, pulsing, thinking force, and that HE is that force, then man will have arrived at another stage in his evolution. When man learns that true thinking is an equilibrium of action and reaction, and that untrue thinking is unequal and opposed action and reaction, and when he further learns that he must suffer the consequences of his unequal actions by paying the penalty through the reaction in accordance with the absolute law from which there is no appeal to God or man, he will then think true. Page 305 When man learns that all his thinking is electro-chemically recorded in the heavy master- I tones which constitute a record of the evolving idea of his self creating soul, and when he finds that a badly opposed record will keep him centuries behind more equally opposed ones, he will then have a thought as to the kind of a soul he is creating. When man learns that this universe of solid things is but a reflection of the ideas of those things, and that he is but a simulation of the idea of himself being thought out in eternity by himself, then he will know the ecstasy of inner thinking Age and "death" are but sequences alternating with youth and life. These two opposing effects of motion are born together but each travels a different direction along the wave of life. They pass each other at maturity where generation of one sequential life ends and its degeneration begins, only to meet again at the inertial plane of eternal life where degeneration ends and regeneration begins in another change of preponderance for another journey through time, space and motion. There is no "death." There is no darkness. There is only life in this universe of light. God is life. God is light. God is all that is. Just so long as man looks for the God-force outside of nature and outside of himself, just so long as he bows in fear to the personal deity of his early inheritance, he will be the slave of his own imaginings. To know that the universal force is Mind, and that man and all else that is is Mind, is to inspire man with the ecstasy of inner thinking. The God-force speaks to inspired man of inner thinking in the universal language of light which all may understand when they but desire to understand. Few there have been but countless numbers there will be who will know the light of inner thinking. Gautama, the Buddha, knew it faintly as Mohammed later knew it. Abraham dimly visioned it. Jacob knew the light less vaguely. The symbol of the Shekinah was his ecstatic visioning. Moses knew the ecstasy of inner thinking in greater clarity. Abraham lived again in Jacob, and in Moses, and again in David. David and the prophets of his primitive day knew the light more clearly still and left a symbol of the seven lights so that others to come might know that they knew tonal laws of evolving and devolving things. David lived again in Jesus. Jesus, the Nazarene, knew the universal language of light in all its fullness. He knew the ecstasy of inner thinking as no man has ever known it. He knew the structure of the atom as no one before or since has known it. Jesus knew the universality of all things, the One-ness of all things. He gave that knowledge to the then dull witted, brutal, lustful, loveless world in His much needed message of brotherly love. He lived again in John, and Paul, and Plotinus, and all those messengers who knew the light of universal thinking. In Jesus day man was not ready for the fullness of His mighty teachings. Man was still new. He was still in the ferment of his intellectual brewing, still searching for the avenging god of tradition to whom he could appeal for preferential rulings. Page 306 Jesus gave to man the One great message of all time. He taught the universality of all things in the white light of the universal One of impartial love from Whose rulings there is no appeal. But only a few could faintly understand. Today the world is ready and eagerly awaits the completion of His message. When Jesus said: "I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now," he referred to His complete knowledge of the universal force. When he further promised, as recorded in the 16th Chapter of John, that the Spirit of truth will again come to "guide you into all truth" and "he will show you things to come," He prophesied the completion from time to time of His unfinished message as evolving man is able to "bear" (comprehend) that message. The illumination of the immaculate light was complete in Jesus. Those messengers of the light who will complete His message to man will comprehend the fullness of His annointing in the light from His words: "All things that the Father bath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall skew it unto you." Jesus gave to man sufficient unto his day and wisely withheld that which should be for another day. That which is herein translated from the light and that which is yet to come, will be for the day of man now dawning. All who desire to know the light of universal thinking can know it when they can but comprehend effects of cause sufficiently well to recollect from within their inner Minds the light of cause. When that day comes to man he will then know that: Everything that is must be of everything else that is. Nothing can be of itself alone. There can be no two of anything in the universe, two substances, two Minds or two beings. All things are universal. ONE. Page 307 Page 308 CONTENTS NEW LAWS AND PRINCIPLES 1. The material substance of Mind cannot evade its materialization into the form desired by Mind. 2. The whole idea of all things is in the seed of all things. 3. All thinking is creating that which it is thinking 4. All idea, and all forms of idea are the result of union between equal or unequal opposite actions and reactions of force. 5. Unions of opposed actions and reactions are possible only within certain limitations. When union does not take place there can be no reproduction 6. Equal and opposite actions and reactions, when united, are satisfied in their unions and will remain united. . 7. Stable unions will always reproduce true to species. 8. Unequal and opposite actions and reactions, when united, are unsatisfied in their unions and will always seek their true tonal mates 9. Unstable unions never reproduce true to species. 10. Unstable unions tend to return to their separate tonal states. . . . . 11. If either mate in an unstable union finds a more equal mate, it will always leave the former and go to the latter. 12. No idea of Mind has place or position in time or space. All idea is universal. 13. All mass is regenerated by absorption of the impacting radio-active energy of all other mass. 14. All mass is degenerated by its own radiation. 15. All mass is generated by accumulation of the universal constant of energy into higher potential. . . . 16. That which is generated must be radiated 17. All opposite effects of motion are simultaneous in their expression. . . 18. The coefficient of cold for an expanded volume of mass of low pressure and potential becomes the coefficient of heat for the same mass in a contracted volume of higher pressure and higher potential. 19. In any wave the induction current seeks the high pressure at the apex of its cone of energy and the conductive current seeks the low pressure at its base. 20. Everything that is, is of everything else that is. Nothing is of itself alone. All created things are indissolubly united 21. There are no unconditioned facts of matter in a universe of motion. There are but appearances of facts. . . . 22. The greater the pressure the higher the freezing point 23. The lesser the pressure the lower the freezing point. 24. No state of motion ever began or ever ended 25. All mass is both electric and magnetic. 26. All mass simultaneously expresses both opposites of all effects of motion, and each opposite is cumulatively preponderant in sequence. 27. All electromagnetic mass forms into systems of units which revolve in spiral orbits both centripetally toward and centrifugally away from nucleal centers. 28. All preponderantly charging systems are positive systems Page 309 29. All preponderantly discharging systems are negative systems. . . . . 30. All preponderantly contracting systems are positive systems. 31. All preponderantly expanding systems are negative systems. . . . . 32. All systems whose spirals are preponderantly closing spirals are positive systems. 33. All systems whose spirals are preponderantly opening spirals are negative systems. 34. All systems of preponderantly lessening volume are positive systems. . . 35. All systems of preponderantly increasing volume are negative systems. 36. All systems of preponderantly increasing potential are positive systems. 37. All systems of preponderantly lowering potential are negative systems. . 38. All preponderantly integrating systems are positive systems. 39. All preponderantly disintegrating systems are negative systems. . . . . 40. All preponderantly generating systems are positive systems. 41. All preponderantly radiating systems are negative systems. 42. All preponderantly heating systems are positive systems 43. All preponderantly cooling systems are negative systems. 44. Electricity attracts, magnetism repels. 45. Electricity and magnetism move in opposite directions, their departure from each other being at 180°.. . 46. Electric lines of force approach each other at 180° 47. Magnetic lines of force depart from the line of direction of electric force and also of magnetic force at 180°. 48. Electric energy reproduces itself by induction and dissipates itself by conduction, at an angle of 90° to the lines of direction of induction and conduction. . . ...... . . . . . 49. All mass is potential out of place, and all mass constantly seeks the proper pressure zone for its constantly changing potential 50. Positive charge attracts positive charge and expels negative discharge.. . . 51. Negative discharge repels both negative discharge and positive charge. . 52. The union of an action with its reaction is always followed by the reproduction of separate actions and reactions. . . . ...... . . . . 53. All mass is generated and regenerated by a contractive pressure exerted in the direction of its gravitative center. Its minimum of generative pressure is exerted from its equatorial plane and its maximum pressure from its pole. 54. All mass is radiated and diffused by an expansive pressure exerted in the direction of its surface. Its minimum of radiative pressure is exerted from its pole and its maximum from its equatorial plane. 55. The generation of all energy is accomplished only through the resistance exerted against the direction of the force of any established motion. . . 56. X in power-time dimension is the square root of X in speed-time distance-area dimension and its cube root in volume. 57. The radiation of all energy is accomplished only by the assistance, exerted in the direction of the force, of any established motion. 58. High potential is generated from low potential against an accumulating pressure resistance equal, in inverse ratio, to the cube of the equilibrium pressure of the low potential, and is degenerated with equal pressure assistance in direct ratio Page 310 59. All motion begins in the plus, contractive, endothermic impulse of thinking, and ends in the succeeding minus, expansive, exothermic impulse.. . . 60. In any mass a change in temperature is in inverse ratio to a change in volume. 61. The greater the positive charge, the greater the pressure of contraction. . 62. The greater the pressure of contraction, the less the volume. 63. The greater the negative discharge, the greater the pressure of expansion. 64. The greater the pressure of expansion, the less the volume. 65. Every pressure develops an exactly equal and opposite resisting pressure. 66. In every mass, the attraction of the accumulating pressure and the repulsion of the distributing pressure exert their forces in opposite directions. . 67. In any mass the lifting capacity, in relation to high potential, is equal to the compression capacity in relation to low potential. 68. The degeneration of any mass is exactly balanced by the regeneration of another mass 69. Every mass has the relative apparent ability to attract and to repel every other mass, its relative ability depending on its relative potential. . . . . 70. Every body attracts and repels every other body with a force which increases and decreases in the universal ratios in accordance with its potential position and according to whether the direction of the mass is toward the north pr toward the south. . 71. Any compound mass of varying, plane will eventually separate into its constituents, each of which will find its true position in its own plane and pressure zone. 72. In any mass its constant of centripetal force is its constant of power to attract. 73. In any mass its constant of centrifugal force is its constant of power to repel. 74. Increase in density means decrease in axial of speed-time dimension and increase in orbital of power-time. . . 75. Activity never lessens and inactivity never increases because of any change of dimension. 76. Every expression of motion has its equal and opposite expression. . . . 77. There can be no increase or decrease in any effect of motion without a balancing increase or decrease in its opposite effect. 78. The power to attract lessens as volume increases. 79. The power to repel also lessens as volume increases. 80. In any mass the decrease in volume is in exact proportion to the increase in its potential. 81. In any mass the decrease in volume is in exact proportion to the increase in positive charge, contraction pressure and temperature. 82. In any mass the greater its speed of revolution, the greater its power to attract and to repel. 83. In any mass the greater its speed of rotation, the less its power to attract and to repel. 84. All mass is simultaneously electric and magnetic, but preponderantly one or the other cumulatively in endless repeative sequence. 85. All mass simultaneously revolves and rotates though one effect is always preponderant while the other one is preparing for its right of preponderance. 86. All opposite effects of motion are simultaneous in the expression of their sex opposition but preponderant in sequence in each sex expression. 87. All idea is repeative and no effect of motion once started ever ends. . Page 311 88. The relative ability of a substance to attract and to repel is in the same ratio as the increase or decrease of the opposing pressures and other dimensions which determine the potential of a charging or discharging system. . 89. In any mass the apparent ability to attract increases with increase of positive charge and decrease of volume; also the apparent ability to repel increases with increase of negative discharge and decrease of volume.. . 90. In any mass the preponderance of the apparent ability to attract or to repel is proportionate to its preponderance of positive charge or negative discharge. 91. In any mass increase of positive charge is accompanied by increase of negative discharge in universal ratio until the conductivity of negative discharge exceeds the inductivity of positive charge, in accordance with the universal law of sequential preponderance of all opposite effects of motion. 92. All mass constantly runs the entire gamut of every dimension of the wave of energy of which it is a swirling part, until it has run the entire cycle represented by that wave. . . . . 93. No mass can remain fixed in position, not even that which has been apparently arrested in its motion. . . . . 94. There is a true position for every potential. 95. Every change of dimension in a mass changes all the dimensions in the mass. 96. Accelerated revolution charges. Charging bodies attract. 97. Accelerated rotation discharges. Discharging bodies repel. 98. The ability of one mass to attract another depends upon the relative positive charge of each and its relative position in respect to other masses. . 99. The ability of one mass to repel another depends upon the relative negative discharge of each and its relative position in respect to other masses. . 100. The cycle of a wave is an orderly progression in the universal direction from south to north by the way of east, and back again to south by the way of west. 101. All masses revolve from the west toward the east around the nucleal centers of their systems throughout the entire cycle of their waves.. 102. All masses rotate upon axes throughout the entire cycle of their waves from the west toward the east of their masses 103. Form in motion is a reflection of concept in inertia 104. All direction is an effect of gravitation and radiation. 105. All gravitative effects are electrically dominated. 106. All gravitative effects are the result of inhalation. 107. All radiative effects are magnetically dominated. 108. All radiative effects are the result of exhalation. ....... . . . . 109. Electricity moves always in the direction of north, by the way of east. 110. Magnetism moves always south, by the way of west 111. In every mass the maximum exertion of the easterly force of contraction is within the charging areas of the generative cones of which the pole of rotation is the axis 112. In every mass the maximum exertion of the westerly force of expansion is within the discharging areas of the radiative cones of which the equator is the base. 113. Contraction is centripetal and expansion is centrifugal Page 312 114. The increase of centripetal force of any mass is in the direction of generation, and the increase of centrifugal force is in the direction of radiation. 115. Centripetal force accumulates and centrifugal force dissipates. . . . . 116. Mass is accumulated in the direction of its generation, and dissipated in the direction of its radiation.. . 117. Centripetal force decelerates rotation and accelerates revolution. . . 118. Centrifugal force accelerates rotation and decelerates revolution.. . 119. The deceleration of rotation is in the direction of generation and deceleration of revolution is in the direction of radiation 120. All vortices turn from west to east and their apices point to north.. . 121. All dimensions contract in the direction of electric force and expand in the direction of magnetic force in universal ratio 122. Every effort of motion which is added to must be equally subtracted from 123. Every plus pressure total must be balanced by a minus one to maintain a system in equilibrium 124. All temperature dimensions of expanding mass increase in their expansion dimension, registering greater cold, and decrease in their contraction dimension, registering greater heat. 125. The seven tones of the universal constant are consecutively removed, one from the other, the square of the distance to the next highest potential. The energy of each of the four units is exactly equal to that of each of the others. 126. All dimensions are pressure dimensions. 127. All dimensions simultaneously expand and contract in opposite directions of the same ratio. 128. Expansion pressure is in direct ratio to the square of the distance, area, plane, orbit or time unit, and to the cube of the volume. 129. Contraction pressure is in inverse ratio to the square of the distance, area, plane, orbit or time unit, and to the cube of the volume 130. Every mass in the universe occupies a measurable potential position. . . 131. Every particle of matter in this universe is connected with every other particle of matter by electric charging poles which are the controls of opposing electromagnetic cones of energy. 132. The nearer to the axis and to the apex of the cone the greater the density, temperature, pressure, potential, power-time and all effects of electropositive preponderance. . . 133. The nearer the base of the cone the greater the tenuity, the speed-time and the tendency to ionize, and the lower the temperature, pressure, potential and all effects of electronegative preponderance 134. The apparent relative ability of mass to attract and to repel is governed by the contraction of its polar magnetic bases and the expansion of its ecliptic 135. The greater the expansion of the ecliptic and the greater the diameters of precessional orbits, the less the ability of a mass to attract and to repel 136. The less the expansion of the ecliptic, and the less the diameters of the precessional orbits, the greater the ability of a mass to attract and to repel 137. In any mass the diameters of its polar magnetic bases and of its axial precessional orbits increase as the mass recedes from, and decrease as it approaches its nucleal sun's equatorial plane. 138. In any mass the expansion of its ecliptic, the diameters of its equatorial precessional orbits and of its polar magnetic bases increase as the mass recedes from, and decrease as it approaches its nucleal sun's equatorial plane. Page 313 139. In any mass, north is the gravitative-radiative center where the apparent ability to attract and to repel is at its maximum 140. South is an extension of the equatorial plane which divides any mass. It is that part of mass where radiative emanations are at their maximum 141. In any mass the area of its ecliptic expansion, the areas of its polar magnetic bases, and the positions of its charging poles are governed by the oblateness of the mass. . . . . . 142. In any mass as oblateness decreases, polar magnetic bases and ecliptic expansion decrease their areas, and charging poles draw closer to its pole of rotation. 143. All motion appears in mass and disappears in plane. 144. The evolution of mass from plane to sphere and its diffusion back to plane are by the way of the cone. . . 145. The greater the complexity of any state of motion, the greater the interval of reproduction of that state of motion 146. The reproductive speed of genero-active light decreases in lowering octaves in inverse universal ratio, and radio-active speed increases in lowering octaves in direct ratio. . . . 147. The lower the potential, the greater the speed of reproduction 148. Every effect of motion in any octave is repeated in sequence in the various speeds of every other octave. . 149. Every effect of motion is cumulative and repeative within its accumulation. 150. Displacement and replacement are universally simultaneous. . . . . 151. An action calculated to displace is simultaneously accompanied by a reaction to replace - 152. All gravitational and radiational expressions are simultaneous in their opposition. 153. All effects of motion are simultaneously opposed, but their repeative acts are sequential. 154. Contracting, generating bodies decelerate the speed of rotation of inner planets by proximity. . . . 155. Deceleration of rotation of the planets of a system increases the surface tension pressure of a system. . . . 156. The greater the deceleration of rotation, the greater the centripetal force of contraction pressure.. . . 157. Acceleration of rotation of the planets of a system decreases the surface tension pressure of a system. . . . 158. The opposites of all effects of motion vary in the opposites of their several dimensions in the direct and the inverse of the universal ratios. . . . 159. Time and power appear by lengthening the day and shortening the year, and disappear by reversing these effects. . ... . ... 160. Heating bodies approach each other and recede from cooling bodies.. 161. Expanding bodies recede from expanding and from contracting bodies. 162. Cooling bodies recede from cooling and from heating bodies. 163. Expanding bodies seek lower pressure equilibriums. 164. Contracting bodies seek higher pressure equilibriums. 165. Heating bodies charge. Charging bodies raise potential 166. Cooling bodies discharge. Discharging bodies lower potential. . . . . 167. Radiating and radiated bodies seek equilibrium positions in lower pressure zones appropriate to their lowered potentials. 168. The greater the resistance of opposing pressures, the higher the melting point of a mass. Page 314 169. The less the resistance of opposing pressures, the lower the melting point of a mass. 170. Every effect of motion is cumulative and repeative within its accumulation. 171. Every effect of motion in any octave is repeated in sequence in the various speeds of every other octave. . 172. In every wave the constant of its cone volume in inertia is the constant of the volume of all masses in motion within the wave. 173. In any mass the speed of rotation of bound energy increases in the direct universal ratio from the gravitative center of force. 174. In any system the speed of revolution of separated equal masses of bound energy revolving in the same plane, decreases in the inverse universal ratio from the center of force. 175. In any system accelerated revolution increases power-time dimension and accelerated rotation increases speed-time dimension. 176. In any mass decelerated rotation increases power-time dimension and decelerated revolution increases speed-time dimension 177. In any mass or system the decrease in rotation or revolution is in inverse universal ratio and is balanced by a corresponding increase of the opposite effect in direct ratio. 178. The greater the resistance the greater the generation of power and the less its dissipation in speed. 179. The less the resistance the less the generation of power and the greater its dissipation in spud. 180. The greater the resistance to an action of force the greater the genero-activity 181. The greater the genero-activity the greater the power of mass to absorb heat. 182. The less the resistance to the reaction of force, the greater the radioactivity 183. The greater the radio-activity the greater the power of mass to give out its heat 184. All mass rolls along the floors of space upon that part of its surface where radiation is at a maximum. . 185. Every equal area of the orbit of any mass must be covered in an equal interval of time. 186. The greater the inclination of any conic section to the base of the cone, the greater the eccentricity of an orbit 187. The acceleration of attraction is always toward the perihelion of an orbit and the deceleration of repulsion is always toward its aphelion. . . 188. In any mass the aphelion of every orbit is the point of maximum exhalation and the beginning of inhalation. 189. In any mass the perihelion of every orbit is the point of maximum inhalation an d the beginning of exhalation. 190. The interval of time between one exhalation-inhalation of any mass is the standard unit year of that mass. 191. The greater the angle of the reflecting plane of forming mass to the plane of concept in inertia, the greater the positive charge and negative discharge of that mass and consequently the greater its ability to appear to attract and to repel. . . 192. Preponderance of power of mass to appear to attract increases as the reflecting plane progresses through the tonal positions of 1+ 2+ and 3+ to its maximum at 4++. 193. Preponderance of power of mass to appear to repel increases as the reflecting plane progresses through the tonal positions of 1— 2— and 3 — to its maximum at 4++. 194. The greater the expansion of the ecliptic plane area of forming mass the less the positive charge and negative discharge of that mass and consequently the less its to appear to attract and repel. . . . Page 315 195. Preponderance of power of mass to appear to attract and to repel increases as expansion of ecliptic plane area decreases 196. In any mass the lower the octave the higher the potential and the slower the speed of reproduction of any effect of motion. 197. In any mass the higher the octave the lower the potential and the greater the speed of reproduction of any effect of motion. 198. In any mass the lower the octave the greater the wave dimension and the lower its tonal registration in sound. 199. In any mass the higher the octave the smaller the wave dimension and the higher its tonal registration in sound. Page 316 Page 317 The University of Science and Philosophy SWANNANOA, WAYNESBORO, VIRGINIA ITS PLAN AND PURPOSE The University of Science and Philosophy, which was formerly The Walter Russell Foundation, was formed for the purpose of giving to the world-family The Message of the Divine Iliad, by Walter Russell, which is a scientific explanation of God's ways and processes in the construction of His universe, and the Message of a Living Philosophy, by Lao Russell, for illumining man's Cosmic way of Life in his long journey of life from the dark to God's Light. These two purposes are ONE, for one gives man the knowledge of how to live life and manifest His Creator, and the other gives him knowledge of what Life is and his relation to his Creator. We fully realize that the human race is in its very early stages and can advance only as new knowledge comes into the world to make one know what life is for, and why God put man here to live it. We fully realize that our present-day world disunity is entirely due to our primacy, and the attendant ignorance of the basic essentials of knowing how to live life. We are still in the stage where our greatest values are money and transient physical possessions, instead of the enduring spiritual values of mutual service of man to man. This early stage of man's unfolding is the cause of wars which men institute to acquire the physical possessions of others for themselves. That stage of greed for power over others, and the physical possessions of others, must be entirely eliminated from human consciousness before a happy race of humanity is possible. To exalt mankind above this present low physical level to the higher spiritual level, which all men will eventually reach. The University of Science and Philosophy has instituted a course of study which gives the knowledge required by man to tell him of himself, his purpose on earth, the laws which govern his own Being, and those concerning his relationship to other men and to Nature. The main foundation of these studies is a one-year Home Study Course, issued monthly in four- lesson units, entitled UNIVERSAL LAW, NATURAL SCIENCE AND LIVING PHILOSOPHY. This course of study was written by both Walter andLao Russell. It has already reached the far corners of the world, even to such remote places as New Zealand, South Africa, South America, Hawaii, Finland, Greece, Iran and of course England and Scotland. Wherever it is reaching, its students are becoming transformed by the knowledge given them of Nature which they have never before been able to obtain. Man must first know about man, himself. That is the most essential of life. A way of life through a living philosophy based upon a knowledge of the laws of Nature, which govern man, is of the greatest import. As students have become transformed through the new knowledge they have gained, others have be- come inspired to do likewise, and that is the way this course of study has spread around the world. The demand is now growing so fast in other non-English-speaking countries for this new knowledge, that we are now preparing to translate our Home Study Course and books into all other languages. All health and the misfortunes of life are the result of not knowing how to obey Natural law. When man learns how to obey Natural law he can then command his life. We teach the power of Mind to command one's own body and keep its normal balance of health. This enables people to heal themselves through Cosmic knowledge. We are not consultants in health matters, nor do we practice Mind healing in any way or manner. It is interesting to know, however, Page 318 how many of our students are healing themselves of various illnesses because of this basic new knowledge of Nature's ways and processes. This Foundation was chartered as a non-profit educational institution in 1948 under the laws of Virginia, by Lao Russell for two purposes: 1, to see her famous husband's works of art gathered together as a Shrine of Beauty to perpetuate for posterity and, 2, to, unite mankind into one world- family upon the basis of brotherly love in human interchange, instead of brotherly conquest of man by man, which has been the basis of world human relations for thousands of years. The more immediate purpose of the Foundation is to save our rapidly decaying civilization from another fall into chaos by bringing the balance of unity between the World-Father and the World- Mother, in order ,-.:hat the management of the World-Family will have the qualities of both the Father and the Mother in its WORLD-HOME. Those who desire to know more about the books and teachings of Dr. Walter and Lao Russell should write to The University of Science and Philosophy, Swannanoa, Waynesboro, Virginia 22980. Page 319 OTHER BOOKS BY WALTER RUSSELL THE SECRET OF LIGHT THE MESSAGE OF THE DIVINE ILIAD—Volume I THE MESSAGE OF THE DIVINE ILIAD—Volume II THE BOOK OF EARLY WHISPERINGS WALTER RUSSELL, Co-Author, with LAO RUSSELL. SCIENTIFIC ANSWER TO HUMAN RELATIONS ATOMIC SUICIDE? THE WORLD CRISIS—Its Explanation and Solution THE ONE-WORLD PURPOSE—A Plan to Dissolve War by a Power More Mighty Than War And One Year Home Study Course of Universal Law, Natural Science and Living Philosophy Page 320
