---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 1 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 1

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 1 of 15
**Words**: ~7,408
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

THE UNIVERSAL ONE An exact science of the One visible and invisible universe of Mind and the registration of all idea of thinking Mind in light, which is matter and also energy WALTER RUSSELL EDITED BY LOUISE RUSSELL VOLUME ONE FIRST PRINCIPLES LIMITED Edition De Luxe UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY Swannanoa, Waynesboro, Virginia Page 2 Copyright 1926 by Walter Russell Copyright 1926 under International Copyright Union (Berne) All rights reserved under International Copyright Convention (1910) by Walter Russell Copyright 1974 by The University of Science and Philosophy No part of this book can be printed in any form without permission in writing from The University of Science and Philosophy, except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review to be printed in a magazine or newspaper. Printed in The United States of America Page 3 PREFACE THE UNIVERSAL ONE was originally published in 1927 and distributed to the top scientists in the country. It is being republished at this crucial period for the sole purpose of again releasing vital new scientific knowledge to this new age- of new comprehension. Today the whole world is in a state of chaos fighting against the forces of greed, envy, jealousy and fear. Disharmony is rife. All of our human relations are in a state of violent upheaval. Civilization is in reverse. Science is being used to destroy instead of to build. We talk of world peace, yet those who are to plan the new world do not know the answer, the solution. Present knowledge of man's relation to Nature and Natural Law which controls his human relations is, as yet, inadequate to meet the situation. Man is still too near his jungle to either know the law which inexorably governs his every action and that of everything in Nature or to comprehend that he must obey Nature or be self-destroyed. Still dominated by jungle habits, he settles his human relations by jungle methods. Wars and world chaos will continue until new knowledge applicable to the coming new cycle in man's evolution is acquired by him. What is this new knowledge? A consistent cosmogony is sorely needed for this newly dawning day of man's exaltation which is to come. Walter Russell spent a full seven years in writing this book. When it was first published in 1927, it won more condemnation than favor from a world which was not then as ready for it as now. The book mixed science and metaphysics in a manner which nullified its impression upon physicists. Gradually, however, many of its then radical statements have been verified by some of the world's greatest scientists and have won him many followers. The physicist draws a sharp line between things which he can in some way detect by the evidence of his senses and things which lie beyond that evidence. There is no denial of a "something" beyond the range of his senses and his sensed instruments, but what may be there is conjectural and, therefore, inadmissible as scientific data of a reliable nature. In other words, material evidence which lies within the narrow limits of man's sense-range is the only admissible evidence to science. But what about that vast range which will not respond to our sensed bodies and sensed instruments? Down the ages a rare few have been permitted to sever the senses which connect matter with its motivated Source in the consciousness of Universal Mind. These few have become conscious of the cosmos and have tried to tell the world of its simplicity. Each of these has faced an impossible task. The generalities and symbols which they did set down have been discounted and relegated to poetry or metaphysics or mysticism. Walter Russell had this same sad experience in the beginning--and all this in face of the fact that the mental state of cosmic consciousness is today admitted, and desired, by the greatest of the world's thinkers, although it is little understood and impossible to induce. In the month of May of 1921, the universal One illumined my beloved husband with the cosmic knowledge contained in his immortal THE DIVINE ILIAD* and commanded him to give this new scientific knowledge to aid mankind in his unfolding into a Cosmic Age of awareness wherein man could become knowing man instead of sensing man. Just as the bolometer and negative have reached beyond man's visible spectrum into the heretofore "unseen," so can man's increasing awareness of his relation to the Source make it possible for him to reach deeper and deeper into the invisible and unseen. Page 5 Such a consciousness can perceive there, with other eyes, that which the senses of man have no way of perceiving. For centuries, science has been searching for the WHY of things in matter and does not seem to realize that the WHY is not in matter at all, nor in space. Space is as much matter as planets are but of an opposite form, potential and purpose. There is something beyond the matter of galaxies and space which the senses cannot fathom but the consciousness can. Beyond that range lies the cause of it, the WHY of it. In trying to awaken within man an awareness of the Source of all science and philosophy by knowing God's ways sufficiently to make them man's ways, Walter Russell has pictured the orderliness, the symmetry and the balance which all Nature expresses. He explains how Nature perpetually polarizes and depolarizes in its every expression, just as you do in your every action and in every second of your life in your brea things, but you are not aware of it. The fulcrum from which all power springs is KNOWLEDGE. When man has that omniscience which is unfolding in cosmic man, he will no longer misuse, break or disobey God's law because of being unaware of it. He will command it because he will know the law. The "life and death" cycles of man and of the elements of matter do not vary. They are the same, for man's body is a compound of these elements. The late Dr. Francis Trevelyan Miller (LITT.D.,LL.D.) Historical Foundations, New York, wrote of Walter Russell's contributions to science as follows: "You have opened the door into the infinite—Science must enter. It may hesitate; it may engage in controversy, but it cannot afford to ignore the principles you have established which eventually will revolutionize man's concept of himself, his world, his universe, and his human problems. "You have done for us in this Twentieth Century what Ptolemy, Euclid, Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler did for their earlier centuries. But you have further penetrated all physical barriers and extended your discoveries into definite forms of the infinite law which created our universe and keeps it in operation with mathematical precision through the millions of years." Sir Oliver Lodge once said that the physicist's type of mind could never fathom the mystery of the universe, and the great story, if it ever came at all, must be "the great inspiration of some poet, painter, philosopher or saint." Less than two hundred geniuses have appeared among men since the beginning of man, and not more than four or five highly illumined mystics. To these we owe what culture the world possesses today, yet our whole educational system is opposing their development, and our society as a whole is more apt to demean than to glorify them. It is most unfortunate that humans do not realize this sorry fact, for as long as man neglects to honor his geniuses who are engaged in the arts of peace and glorifies his "heroes" who are most proficient in the arts of war, the human race will continue to suffer the agonies of its own making. This now ending Barbaric Age is peopled with God fearing men. The dawning Cosmic Age is being peopled with God-loving men. The coming race of men will know that love is all there is in God-nature and that the manifestation of love is all there is in the physical universe. The Law of Love is rhythmic balanced interchange between all things. Upon the law of balanced interchange, this entire reciprocal universe is motivated with such exactness of balance that astronomers can calculate the positions of planets and suns to the split second. In this wise, the universe is dependable. It observes the Law. It cannot do otherwise where God controls all things. In Walter Russell's worldwide acclaimed book, THE SECRET OF LIGHT, is the following Page 6 fragment from THE DIVINE ILIAD: "Again I say that all things extend to all things, from all things, and through all things. For, to thee I again say, all things are Light, and Light separates not; nor has it bounds; nor is it here and not there. "Man may weave the pattern of his Self in Light of Me, and of his image in divided Lights of Me, e'en as the sun sets up its bow of many hues from divided Light of Me, but man cannot be apart from Me, as the spectrum cannot be apart from Light of Me. "And as the rainbow is a light within the light, inseparable, so is Man's Self within Me, inseparable; and so is his image My image. "Verily I say, every wave encompasseth every other wave unto the One; and the many are within the One, e'en down to the least of waves of Me. "And I say further that every thing is repeated within every other thing, unto the One. "And furthermore I say, that every element which man thinketh of as of itself alone is within every other element, e'en to the atom's veriest unit. "When man queries thee in this wise: `Sayest thou that in this iron there is gold and all things else?' thou may' st answer: 'Within the sphere, and encompassing it, is the cube, and every other form that is; and within the cube, and encompassing it, is the sphere, and every other form that is." We are at the dawning of a glorious New Age of knowledge and awareness of our oneness with all life. May we bring into being in this twentieth century the Life Triumphant for all peoples everywhere and thus fulfill our sole purpose on earth—which is to discover our divinity and live it! (1974 printing) LAO RUSSELL Special Notation: In the interim of the writing of THE UNIVERSAL ONE from 1921-1927 to 1947 when THE SECRET OF LIGHT was released—and also our book entitled ATOMIC SUICIDE? which was published in 1957—Dr. Russell's thoughts and awareness matured in expression and he clarified and rectified errors he felt that he had committed in his earlier writings. It was never his intention to reprint THE UNIVERSAL ONE. However, because of the numerous requests that we have been receiving for copies of this great book, and because it may be of untold help at this crucial period in mankind's progress, we are reprinting it in its original form. L.R. Page 7 PRELUDE HE supreme service which man can render to evolving man is to answer for him, dynamically, the great heretofore unanswerable question concerning the One universal force which man calls God, or Mind, or by other names. For long ages man has impatiently awaited the knowledge which would tear away the veil from the invisible universe which lies beyond his perception and bring it within the range of both his perception and his exact comprehension. Mathematical and measurable proof of the existence of but One Mind, One force and One substance would give to man absolute control over matter, the power to create, even as God creates, and within the same limitations. Man is omnipotent when he but knows his omnipotence. Until that day he is but man. Voltaire said that man could never comprehend God for man must be God to comprehend Him. Man is God and therefore God is within the comprehension of man. Man is Mind. Man is matter. Mind and matter are One. God is Mind. This is a universe of Mind, a finite universe, limited as to cause, and to the effect of cause. A universe of limitations cannot be infinite. There is no infinite universe. A finite universe, in which the effects of cause are limited, must also be limited as to cause; so when that measureable cause is known then can man comprehend and measure all effects. The effects-of cause are complex and mystify man but cause itself is simple. The universe is a multiplicity of changing effects of but One unchanging cause. All things are universal. Nothing is which is not universal. Nothing is of itself alone. Man and Mind and all creating things are universal. No man can say: "I alone am I." There is but One universe, One Mind, One force, One substance. When man knows this in measurable exactness then will he have no limitations within those which are universal. He will then know that all knowledge exists within man and is subject to his desire to recall it from within his inner Mind. Knowledge is not acquired from without but merely recollected from within. The recollection of knowledge from within is an electromagnetic process of thinking Mind which is as exactly under man's control as is the generation of the same power to turn a wheel. Page 8 Man must "think in light"; his thinking must be in terms of the electromagnetic periodicities which measure all motion, for of such is he himself, and nothing else. To know how to think in light from within is to open the doors of all knowledge. Omnipotence lies in perfect thinking. There is no power in this universe other than the energy of thinking Mind. Thinking is the cause of motion and the periodicities, or states of motion, caused by thinking Mind are registered in light which man calls "matter." Matter is light. Nothing is which is not light. We are prone to think that this civilization of ours is an extremely advanced one. On the contrary, man of today is in an exceedingly primitive state of his evolution. He is a bearer of heavy burdens, sweating at heavy labor in the bowels of the earth because of his pitiful ignorance of universal power which awaits only his- knowledge to render it available for his free use. Knowledge of the One Thing will lift the yoke which man has placed on his own shoulders. This knowledge is herein written down in the language of a new dynamic science of new concepts which are measurable; which explain the heretofore unexplainable. Language is lacking in words to express new knowledge. Seemingly contradictory words must be used in the hope that the intent will be understood by taking all that is herein written and putting it together, rather than in trying to find comprehension through the analysis of a few inadequate words in isolated paragraphs. For all those questions which lie unanswered within the heart of man there is a dynamic answer, such an answer as two and two make four. Faith and theory regarding the universal One need have no place in the thinking of man. They are wanderings in the dark. All things are answerable in light. The universe is a tonal one, a dimensionless universe of light. All nature is a series of orderly tonal periodicities of the One force, assembled into the complex idea of thinking Mind, and registered in light, or matter, or energy in interchanging potentials, all of which are variable, yet comprehensible and measurable states of motion of the One substance. All dimension is an illusion, an appearance, due to rising potential, which must disappear into its inevitable sequence of lowering potential, and again appear in endless cycles of appearance, disappearance and reappearance. Ecstatic man is he who can think in those high octaves of the inner Mind which has been termed "spirit." Page 9 Ecstatic man is inspired man of universal genius, of inner thinking. Inspired man is he to come whose thinking will be from within, in light, and it will be an ecstasy of thinking which will produce enduring things. That work which is created in ecstasy of inner thinking can alone endure. To think in light is not a new power being developed by evolving man. It is a power which is now within him awaiting only his knowledge of the use of that power. It is merely the recognition by man of his absolute control of the many dimensions of the universal constant of energy which constitutes the thinking process of Mind exactly as he can control the changing speeds of his motor car. When man can change the low speed of his objective thinking in this universe of dimension to the high speed of his inner thinking where dimension disappears in light, then is he superman. Then is he universal genius. Light is the universal language in which the Divine Concept is plainly written. Fundamentally wrong in its basic premises, and wasteful in its practice, man's modern concept of the universe must be torn down and built again on truth as plainly told in light. Primitive in his concepts, man divides the universe into the seen and the unseen, then finds himself groping in the dark, blindfolded, hopelessly trying to find the way to the door of the Holy of Holies. There is no unseen universe. The way to that innermost sanctuary of the Most High is as clearly posted as the Lincoln Highway; but man has not been able to read the plainly worded messages written all along the way in light. Man's most wonderful of instruments, the spectroscope, has told him little, for he has not yet learned to read it. He does not know that those many lines of light are but letters of the alphabet of light in which the universal One registers His mighty thinking in the universal language of light. The spectrum of iron is to man naught but the spectrum of iron. To the cosmic import of those many glowing lines he is indeed blind. Again, in helium he reads the lines as helium's lines and sees not in them the plain story simply told of six new elements of vast import awaiting man's use in the easing of his burden. And of those most important of the elements, which man calls the "inert gases," nothing at all is known except that they will not combine with any other elements. O the pity of it! Wrong concepts of the atom's structure and the modern electric theory, of energy and its transmission, of conductivity, radiation and gravitation, and of that electrochemical state of opposed motion called luminosity, all of these wrong concepts of motion, and of matter, must be remoulded on truth. With truth comes knowledge; and with knowledge power to transmute at will, and simply, plentiful substances of matter into those which are the rarest, to meet the needs of man. Page 10 There is no substance which nature produces which man cannot produce, or synthesize, or "create" from apparent nothingness when he knows that which is herein written down and charted. Man's miracles of today become commonplace events of tomorrow. Civilizations come and go, exalted by man's thinking or by it plunged into the abyss of darkened ages. This message is for all mankind and not for the few, for it is placing within his hands a power which could either glorify or frightfully enslave him in accord with the usage of that power. Either way it matters not, for in the end truth will survive, and man will complete his destiny. Truth lives. There is naught but truth and that which appears to be otherwise has no existence and therefore is not, nor ever will be. Page 11 CONTENTS BOOK I Page CHAPTER I Creation ........................................................................................................................................ 18 CHAPTER II The Life Principle ........................................................................................................................ 21 Chart - 24 CHAPTER III Mind, the One Universal Substance ............................................................................................ 27 Charts - 29, 31 CHAPTER IV Thinking Mind ............................................................................................................................. 33 CHAPTER V The Process of Thinking .............................................................................................................. 35 Charts -38, 40, CHAPTER VI Thinking Is Registered in Matter . . ............................................................................................. 41 CHAPTER VII Concerning Appearances .............................................................................................................. 42 CHAPTER VIII The Sex Principle ......................................................................................................................... 44 CHAPTER IX Sex Opposites of Light ................................................................................................................. 48 CHAPTER X The Reproductive Principle ......................................................................................................... 50 CHAPTER XI Energy Transmission ................................................................................................................... 53 CHAPTER XII This Is a Finite Universe .............................................................................................................. 57 CHAPTER. XIII A Dimensionless Universe .......................................................................................................... 59 Page 12 CHAPTER XIV Concerning Dimension ................................................................................................................. 61 CHAPTER XV The Formula of the Locked Potentials ......................................................................................... 64 Chart - 66 CHAPTER XVI Universal Oneness ....................................................................................................................... 67 Chart - 68, 69 CHAPTER XVII Omnipresence .............................................................................................................................. 72 CHAPTER XVIII Omnipotence ................................................................................................................................ 73 CHAPTER XIX Omniscience ................................................................................................................................ 75 Chart - 88, 89 BOOK II CHAPTER I Dynamics of Mind Concerning Light Units of Matter ................................................................. 91 CHAPTER. II Electricity and Magnetism ........................................................................................................... 100 CHAPTER III New Concepts of Electricity and Magnetism .............................................................................. 109 CHAPTER IV Positive and Negative Electricity ................................................................................................ 117 Chart - 119 CHAPTER V The Elements of Matter ............................................................................................................... 121 Chart - 123, 124 CHAPTER VI The Ten Octave Cycle of the Elements of Matter ........................................................................ 125 Charts - 126, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137 Page 13 CHAPTER VII The Instability, and the Illusion of Stability in Motion ............................................................... 139 Charts - 141, 143 CHAPTER. VIII The Universal Pulse ..................................................................................................................... 144 Charts - 145, 147, 148, 149 CHAPTER IX Concerning Energy ....................................................................................................................... 150 Chart - 152 CHAPTER X Electro-Magnetic Pressures ......................................................................................................... 157 Chart - 165, 166 CHAPTER. XI Attraction and Repulsion ............................................................................................................. 167 Chart - 180 CHAPTER. XII Gravitation and Radiation ............................................................................................................. 183 CHAPTER XIII Expressions of Gravitation and Radiation —Universal Direction .............................................. 192 Charts - 194, 196, 198, 200 CHAPTER. XIV Universal Mathematics--Universal Ratios ................................................................................... 201 Charts - 203, 205, 208, 209 EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION CHAPTER. XV The Electric Charging Poles and Magnetic Discharging Bases .................................................. 210 Charts - 211, 214, 217, 219, 220, 222, 224 CHAPTER XVI The Wave ..................................................................................................................................... 225 Charts - 227, 229 CHAPTER XVII Time--The Fourth Dimension ...................................................................................................... 232 Charts - 235 Page 14 CHAPTER XVIII Temperature--The Eighth Dimension ........................................................................................... 240 Charts - 245, 247 CHAPTER XIX Color--The Fifteenth Dimension .................................................................................................. 250 CHAPTER XX Universal Mechanics--Rotation--Revolution--Mass--Plane ......................................................... 255 Charts -257, 259, 261 CHAPTER XXI Rotation--The Twelfth Dimension ............................................................................................... 267 Charts -269, 271, 273, 275, 277, 279 CHAPTER XXII Revolution--The Thirteenth Dimension ....................................................................................... 280 Charts - 283, 285 CHAPTER XXIII Crystallization--The Tenth Dimension ........................................................................................ 286 CHAPTER XXIV Plane and Ecliptic--The Sixteenth and Eighteenth Dimensions ................................................... 288 CHAPTER XXV Ionization--The Ninth Dimension ............................................................................................... 292 Charts -293, 296 CHAPTER XXVI Valence--The Eleventh Dimension .............................................................................................. 298 CHAPTER XXVII Tone--The Seventeenth Dimension ............................................................................................. 300 CHAPTER. XXVIII Conclusion .................................................................................................................................... 304 New Laws and Principles ........................................................................................................... 309 END .............................................................................................................................................. 320 Page 15 Page 16 Page 17 CONTENTS BOOK I CHAPTER I CREATION DIVINE MIND--GOD--SPIRIT CREATION AND THE ORDER OF CREATION In the beginning, God. There is but one God. There is but one universe. God is the universe. God is not one and the universe another. The universe is not a separate creation of God's. It is God. There is no created-universe. Nothing is which has not always been. All created things are from the beginning. They have no beginning. They do not come into being. They are and always have been and always will be. Creation means to man the coming into existence of something which was not before in existence. Man's concept of creation is the coming into being of a physical, visible universe heretofore non- existent. The Creator is to man's mind a Sublime Being, separate and apart from man, who created the physical universe of matter, causing to come into being that which had not been. Man holds the concept of two universes; a spiritual and a physical. God is presumed to be of the spiritual universe, perfect. Matter is of the physical universe, imperfect. God supposedly created the imperfect physical universe separate and apart from Himself. Man conceives a perfect and omnipotent God. A perfect and omnipotent God could not create imperfection. He could not create a lesser than Himself. He could not create a greater than Himself. God could not create other than Himself. God did not create other than Himself, nor greater, nor lesser than Himself. In the sense generally understood by man God did not create anything. Nothing has been "created." This is a "creating" universe, not a "created" one. Man's concept of the sublime Being as the Creator of a material universe different in substance from the spiritual universe is a misconcept. God is all there is. Beyond God there is nothing. Superior to God there is nothing. Page 18 Inferior to God there is nothing. Opposed to God there is nothing. Creation is not more, nor is it less than it has always been from the beginning. It cannot be more than God nor can it be less than God. "Creation" is an apparent integration in continuity of that which already exists in substance. It is a periodic change of state of the One unchanging substance. It is evolution. De-creation is an apparent disintegration in continuity of apparently integrated things returned to that substance. It is dissolution. God is in reality, and exists in substance. God is thinking Mind. The substance, or body, of God is light. The One universal substance,' which is God, is a tangible substance, a thinking substance, comprehensible and describable and possessed of principles which are familiar to man through man's observation of the One universal substance in "created" things. The substance of all "created" things is light. The One substance of thinking Mind is all that exists. The "created"universe is the registration in matter of the idea of thinking Mind. Mind is expressed in light. Light is the storehouse of the energy of thinking Mind. The energy of the universe is the energy of thinking Mind. The universe is a universe of energy. Energy is expressed in light. Mind is the universe. Mind substance is "spiritual" substance. Spirit is light. Spirit is the ultimate, the eternal, though finite substance. Spirit is not infinite. Nothing in this universe of motion is infinite. Man's concept of an infinite God, possessing infinite knowledge and infinite power, Creator of an infinite universe of infinite extension, is not in accord with the laws of motion. This is a boundless, eternal, dimensionless universe of definite limitations both as to all cause and to all effects of cause. Dimension is an illusion of relation of effects, which are in themselves but illusions. All cause is comprehensible to, and all effects are measurable by man. A limited, measurable uni- verse cannot be infinite; and a Divinity limited as to His range of cause, which, ipso facto, limits the possible range of effect, cannot be infinite. Light is the living substance of Mind in action. It is the creating principle of the One substance. The One substance is the etheric "spiritual" substance of the One universal Mind. The entire "created" universe of all that is, ever has been, or ever will be, is but the One substance in motion, light. God is light and in Him is no darkness at all. (John i-5.) Matter is light. Page 19 God and matter are One. Spirit and matter are the same substance. That substance is light. There are not two substances in the universe. There cannot be two substances in the universe. The substance of the universal Mind is a living substance. That which man calls life is an inherent property of the entirety of Mind. Light is life. There is but One Life in the universe. The whole of the universe is but One living, breathing, pulsing Being. There are not two lives or two living beings in the universe. There are not two of any thing in the universe. The universe and all that is, is One. Page 20 CONTENTS CHAPTER II THE LIFE PRINCIPLE LIFE IS THE PULSING, ELECTROMAGNETIC OSCILLATION OF THINKING MIND All life is immortal life. There is no mortal life. Life is a vitalizing property of all matter. Life is in and of all matter. Man's concept of life is not logical. Man conceives life to be a property apart from matter, quickening compound elements of inorganic matter into living, functioning, organic beings. Man defines organic matter as that in which life begins to function, imbuing it with vitality and intelligence. Man defines inorganic matter as those elements or compounds of matter in which there is no life and in which there is no vitality nor intelligence. Man conceives life as spontaneously generated in matter at favorable temperatures and under favorable conditions. Such concepts are not true concepts. In searching for the life principle man is attempting to discover something corresponding to a germ which quickens lifeless matter. Life is not a germ and no matter is lifeless. Life is in and of all things from the beginning, always and forever. Life has no beginning. Life has no ending. Life is eternal. Life is in and of all inorganic as well as all organic matter. Life is in and of all of the elements and the atoms of the elements and the compounds of the elements. Life is in and of the sun of the atom, the planets of the atom and the heavens surrounding the universe of the atom. Life is the effect produced on the substance of Mind by the sequence of alternating electromagnetic pulsations which constitute the process of thinking. The progress of this effect is registered in integrating light and manifests itself in that orderly periodic phenomenon inherent in all matter and all things which man calls "growth." All "growing" things are imbued with the life principle. All things are "growing" things. All matter is evolving. All matter is growing. All matter is living. Life is merely the registration, in matter, of states of motion of thinking Mind. The substance of Mind has the appearance of many states of motion which man calls the "elements of matter." The "elements of matter" do not vary in substance. They vary only in their states of motion. Page 21 All motion is periodic and evolutionary. All motion is motion in equilibrium. No other motion is possible. All motion has the appearance of being divided into opposites. These opposites of motion shall henceforth be termed "motion-in-inertia" and "motion-in- opposition." All that appearance which man calls matter is "motion-in-opposition." Motion-in-opposition is under either preponderantly electric or magnetic domination. It is a state of motion where pressures are unequalized and sustained in their state of unequalization by the resistance of the two opposing forces in motion. The point of maximum motion-in-opposition is the nucleal center of a unit or system where opposing pressures reach their point of maximum pressure. Form of matter disappears into motion-in-inertia. Motion-in-inertia is equally electric and magnetic. Neither force dominates. It is a state of motion where pressures are equalized. Man's concept of life is energized, organic substance. Man's concept of death is de-energized, organic substance. There is no death. Life is eternal. The One substance of the universe cannot become de-energized. Man's concept of life belongs to motion-in-opposition. Man's concept of death belongs to motion- in-inertia. Life belongs, in principle, to motion. This is a universe of motion. The cause of all motion is the dynamic action of thinking of the One universal living Being, which man calls God, or Mind, or by other names, all of which stand practically for the one idea of fatherhood, or deity. Thinking is a process, an orderly, evolutionary, periodic process of absolute limitations. All motion of thinking Mind is born in the maximum high speed of the universal constant of energy. It runs the gamut of periodic and opposing deceleration and acceleration in six full tones, one double tone, and a master-tone, to each of ten lowering octaves, and a variable number of mid-tones in each of the last four octaves. The seven tones are those so-called "elements of matter" which are improperly classified in the eight groups of the commonly accepted Mendeléef periodic table. All effects of motion which cause the appearance of these elements is that which is herein termed "motion-in-opposition." The master-tone of each octave is the record of all motion taking place within the octave. The master-tones are the turning points between reaction and action, just as the double tones are the turning points between action and reaction. They are the beginnings of each new expression of energy in motion and are records of the old. They are the ends of exhalations and the beginnings of inhalations. The master-time of each octave is the inheritance of the original motion of the thinking process of Mind. These master-tones are the 'inert gases" which are classified in the zero group of the Mendeleef table. The state of motion of these inert gases is that of motion-in-inertia. Motion-in-inertia is that state of pressure equilibrium which lies between any two masses. The inertial line, or plane, is that dividing line, or plane, toward which all masses discharge their Page 22 potential. It is the line, or plane, of lowest potential of two opposing areas of potential, where opposing pressures neutralize. This is the plane of minimum pressure of two opposing areas. The master-tones which represent a state of motion-in-inertia and are the inert gases, bear the same relationship to the elements that white bears to the colors. They are a registration of them all. White is not included in the spectrum, it has no place there. The inert gases should not be included in the elements. They have no place there. Of this more shall be written later in its proper place. The ten octaves constitute a cycle of evolving states of motion. This cycle includes the Page 23 uttermost limitations of divine possibilities, and beyond it nothing is or can be. The cycle begins with the highest note and descends the scale sequentially through man's unseen universe until hydrogen, the first element perceivable to man, is reached. Page 24 There is no unseen universe. Those tones which follow hydrogen are man's visible or "physical" universe of matter and continue into the tenth octave. Here elemental integration and disintegration have ended the cycle by the attainment of the equilibrium of its beginning. All motion is oscillatory, swinging in sequence between two apparently opposing forces, gravitation and repulsion, which are respectively electric and magnetic. This oscillatory motion is a pulsating in-breathing and out-breathing, an inhalation and an exhalation, which is a characteristic of all matter, whether it be in units, or systems of units, or mass. These two apparently opposite forces are the father-mother forces of Mind, which, added together, make but the One force. There is but one pendulum to the cosmic clock. All the so-called "created" universe of matter is but the effect of these two apparently opposing male - female forces exerting their opposition. All motion-in-opposition is both gravitative and repulsive. This is characteristic of all matter. Motion, at the inertial line or plane where mass disappears, is neither gravitative nor repelative. Hence the muter-tones, which register effects of motion on this line or plane, should not be included in the table of the elements. All matter is characterized by periodic and alternating opposites of motion in sequence, each opposite being preponderant in sequence. Each opposite force is the cause of the other. Opposition is a characteristic appearance of all effects of motion and has no existence other than as an appearance. In inertia, this appearance always disappears. Motion and matter must not be confounded. Matter, as man understands matter, is only an appearance due to states of motion. The creation of form in matter is the apparent integration of those things which are and always have been. The de-creation of form in matter is the apparent disintegration of apparently integrated things. Creation is transmutation, or integration, of the one simple indivisible substance, into the appearance of many complex substances and things. Creation may be likened unto the assembling of a few letters of type for the printing of a very complex idea. De-creation may be likened unto the redistribution of type, after it has served its purpose of giving expression to idea on the printed page. Matter is light crystallized into the complex idea of this universe, exactly as literature is type assembled into the complex ideas of a library. Matter is the registration medium of light, just as letters are the registration medium of literature. Matter is light gravitationally assembled into the appearance of form, and radially disassembled into the disappearance of form. The assembling process is what man calls life. The disassembling process is what man calls death. Light' exists as light always and forever. All matter is but a variation of the state of light due to variation of dimension of the evidence of motion in the wave by which all motion is expressed. To man, matter means the complexity of many substances and many things. Page 25 Complexity and variability belong to motion and not to substance. There is but One unchanging substance. The appearance of change does not belong to substance but to motion. Man lives in a universe of motion, a universe of appearances and illusions which deceive him, except for those simple, obvious illusions with which he becomes perfectly familiar. Man will stoutly aver that matter changes and that there are many substances, but he would not dream of contending that the moon runs along the road behind the trees as he runs. Yet one contention would be as reasonable as the other. Matter and Mind and light and energy are eternal. They are constant. They are cause. Form and motion are illusions. They are fleeting. They are effects. Page 26 CONTENTS CHAPTER III MIND, THE ONE UNIVERSAL SUBSTANCE Mind is the universe. It is all that is, ever was or ever will be. Mind is a substance, a material substance. The substance of Mind is the foundation of creation. It is the seed of the universe. In the seed of the universe is the whole of the universe. The substance of universal Mind has no beginning, no ending and no bounds. It is all intelligent, all-powerful and all-present. The One substance is absolutely frictionless, temperatureless, non - compressable, non - expandable, non-absorbent, non-reflectant, non-resistant and non-refractive; but, potentially, it contains the appearance of all these qualities through the dynamic action of those opposing forces within it which cause it to be a thinking substance in motion. These qualities belong to motion and appear only through motion-in-opposition. They are not qualities which belong to the One substance. They are appearances which disappear in the inertial plane of pressure equilibrium which lies between any two masses, hence they have no existence other than as an appearance of existence. The cause of the appearance of change of the One substance is through change of state, but change of state is not change of substance. Change of state is not an attribute of substance. It belongs to motion. It is an illusion of motion which creates the illusion of dimension. The substance of Mind is the one prechemical substance which is the source of all L the elements and the compounds of the elements, all of which are but appearances. These appearances register the action of the process of thinking, and disappear back into their source of an absolute temperatureless state of motion-in-inertia. The material substance of Mind is an all pervading ether which is indivisible, inseparable, indestructible, unalterable and unchangeable; but potentially it contains the appearance of all these dimensions of separability in the states of motion which register the dynamic process of thinking. The words "spirit" and "ether" are used to express the tenuity of the dimensionless universe, as "solidity" is used to express the compactness of the apparently measurable universe. States of motion-in-opposition cause the appearance of change from the state of motion-in-non- opposition or inertia, into the appearance of separability into parts. This results in such effects of motion as heat, cold, color, form, sex, growth, valence, ionization, mass, gravity, radiation and many others. These effects are not a change of substance nor do they divide, alter or separate the One substance of Mind. They are but dimensions. All effects have the appearance of dimension; they are in themselves but dimensions of that which they appear to be. The cause of all effects is dimensionless. Cause is existent. Effect is an illusion of existence. It but appears to exist. Change of state appears to change the character of the One substance, but appearances have no existence. Page 27 Man is accustomed to appearances. Two objects exactly similar appear dis-similar in perspective. This is a universe of appearances all of which are relative, and not one of which would have even the appearance of existence without the relation of others. Without the illusion of separability, space could not be. Without events, time could not be. Without motion-in-opposition neither heat, cold, color, sex, mass or any of the effects of thinking could be or appear to be. Without the variability of motion-in-opposition there could be no appearance of variability in the chemistry of the One substance. Man's many elements are but variances in states of motion-in-opposition of the One unchanging substance. They all appear to have separate and distinct characteristics of their own in varying degrees, such as melting points, specific gravity, atomic weight, volume, ionization, stability, valence, electro-magnetic charge, axial rotation, orbital revolution and many other characteristics, which give them the appearance of being separate and different substances. They are neither separately created individual things nor are they different substances. Their appearance of separability and difference of substance is due solely to the periodicity of states of motion-in-opposition. The universal substance of light is a material substance of variable motion which is due to the variability of opposition set up by the two apparently opposing forces of action and reaction which constitute the thinking process. It is apparently shorn or torn into apparent particles of itself during the process of creative thinking, but actually is unseparated and undivided in the process of that shearing or tearing. It is without form but potentially it contains all that man calls form. Form is but an appearance, an effect of motion-in-opposition. The greater the opposition of the two opposing forces the greater the rigidity of form and mass, and the more distinctive is its appearance of existence. All of those elements between the third gravitational and third radiational tones, the atomic structures of which are very much contracted in volume, and represent motion in maximum opposition, are the hard, dense, heavy solids of great rigidity. Such metals for example as iron, copper, gold, silver, manganese, nickel and tungsten; the elements which form such compounds as granite, quartz and flint; and those elements which form such precious stones as the diamond, ruby and emerald; all these elements are made up of light units in maximum motion-in-opposition. They are very densely packed together in atomic construction, and very closely integrated. Their electric and magnetic orbits are in spirals of one plane and are very much extended. Their melting points are very high. A study of the charts will show this clearly. The less the opposition of the two opposing forces the less the rigidity of form and mass, and the more indistinct is its appearance of existence. All of those elements which, born near the inertial planes of their octaves, indicate by their tonal position on their octave waves a close relation to motion-in-inertia and a lessening degree of opposition, are the softer, less distinct substances. Page 28 Page 29 Such elements and compounds as lithium, bromine, sodium, chlorine, salt, sulphur, potassium, iodine, tellurium, magnesium, strontium and rubidium are formed of light units of less potential energy. The atomic structure of these elements is not closely integrated, but is open, nebulous and very much expanded. Their electric and magnetic orbits are in spirals of many planes, approaching nebulosity in appearance as their position nears their inertial planes. Their melting points are very low. A study of the charts will show this clearly. Form, therefore, is not an attribute of the One substance and has no existence other than as an appearance. Form, like time, space, mass, color, weight, temperature and other effects of motion is an attribute of motion only, and in no way an attribute of substance.
