---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 12 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 12

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 12 of 15
**Words**: ~7,403
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

In other words, that which we call cold is assumed to be less heat. This idea must be eliminated from man's thinking. Heat and cold are as much the opposites of temperature dimension as positive and negative electricity, contraction pressure and expansion pressure are opposites of other dimensions. Every dimension must have its opposite expressions which persist in their opposition. Each of these are not relatively less or more of the other. Deceleration is not less acceleration. It is the result of the expression of one force just as acceleration is the result of the expression of its opposite. Neither is negative electricity less positive electricity. Neither is the blue end of the spectrum less of the red end of the spectrum. It is as inaccurate to describe cold as less heat as to describe blue as less red, or to describe negative discharge as less positive charge. Cold, expansion pressure, radiation, the blue half of the spectrum and negative electricity are the evidences of the domination of one of the two opposing forces, every expression of which is in an opposite direction from that in which heat, contraction pressure, generation, the red half of the spectrum and positive electricity are expressed. The greater the contraction of charging bodies the more heat a body will register from generation, and conversely, the greater the expansion of discharging bodies, the more cold a body will register from radiation. Like the pressure gage on the boiler which indicates the pressure developed within, or the voltmeter on the dynamo which indicates the resistance to induction developed by the charging of the generator, or the ammeter which registers the discharge conducted from that accumulated voltage, heat measures the resistance which magnetism sets up against integration by compression into smaller volume, and cold measures its disintegration by expansion into larger volume. Contraction of volume by integration of the same mass into lesser space is resisted by expansion pressure. Resistance to contraction heats by the opposition of the opposing forces. Heating bodies approach each other and recede from cooling bodies. If this law of motion is well founded, then heating bodies and the attraction of gravitation must be related. Expansion of volume by disintegration into greater space is assisted by the expulsive force of contraction pressure. Page 240 Expanding bodies recede from expanding and from contracting bodies. If this law of motion is well founded then cooling bodies, expanding bodies and the repulsion of radiation must be related. Expanding bodies cool. Expansion of volume repels. Cooling bodies recede from cooling and from heating bodies. Expanding bodies seek lower pressure equilibriums. Cooling bodies contract. Contracting bodies attract. Contracting bodies seek higher pressure equilibriums. To the process of contraction is due the illusion of attraction. Contraction of volume is nature's process of integration. Approaching bodies mutually heat. Heating bodies charge. Charging bodies raise potential. If this law is well founded then heat, charging bodies and the attraction of gravitation must be related. Also positive charge must attract positive charge. Heating bodies radiate. Radiating bodies repel all other bodies. Receding bodies mutually cool. Radiation cools the radiating body and the emanated body. Cooling bodies discharge. Discharging bodies lower potential. If this law is well founded then cold, discharging bodies and the repulsion of radiation must be related. Also negative discharge must repel both negative discharge and positive charge. bodies Dooms contract and contracting bodies heat. The re-heating of degenerating bodies by contraction is nature's process of regeneration. Heat is ejected from heated bodies. Radiation lowers pressure and potential of radiating and ejected bodies. Radiating and radiated bodies seek equilibrium positions in lower pressure zones appropriate to their lowered potentials. Radiation of heat is nature's process of solidifying integrated substances of cooling bodies into locked potential positions. Radiation expands and the consequential regeneration freezes the emanations expelled from radiating bodies. It also cools the radiating body, thus regenerating it also. Expansion disintegrates the emanating body. Disintegration is nature's process of redistribution. Disintegration freezes radiating and radiated bodies. Cooling is nature's process of effecting rigidity in radiating bodies and beginning the repetition of the same process in emanated bodies. Radiation is discharge. Discharging and discharged bodies cool. Cooling bodies generate. Generating bodies draw closer to each other. They attract. Generation heats. Heating under pressure is nature's method of assembling mass. Heating is nature's process of moulding form. Cooling is nature's process of complexing form. Page 241 All form is simplified by heating. All form becomes complex by cooling. The sun of a system shapes her melted planets into spheres, the simplest of forms, puts them out to cool and thus begins their complexing. The complexities of nature's multitudinous forms in those effects which we call "living" matter, begin with cooling. The closer the planets of a system, the more retarded the speed-time dimension and the higher the melting points of the system. It takes great contraction pressure to force bodies into close proximity The greater the contraction pressure, the greater the resisting pressure. The greater the resistance of opposing pressures, the higher the melting point of a mass. If this law is well founded, then high melting point, high pressure equilibrium and the attraction of gravitation are related. Bodies in close proximity will not remain in close proximity if the contraction pressure force which keeps them there is released by the counter pressure of expansion. The less the resistance of opposing pressures, the lower the melting point of a Mass. If this law is well founded, then low melting point, low pressure equilibrium, and the repulsion of radiation are related. Thus it may be seen that preponderance of one opposite effect of motion is the condition precedent for the appearance of the other. Thus it may be seen that heat and cold, like all other effects of motion, take their respective positions on the universal see-saw and tilt up and down simultaneously but alternate in their sequential preponderance of opposition. Thus it may also be seen that temperature is but an effect of motion, an illusion of dimension, born of motion only. It is in no way an attribute of substance. The One substance cannot be heated nor can it be cooled. Like all opposites heat and cold are born with and of each other. Let us consider whether or not the following commonly accepted temperature cycle is correct and complete. "Cold contracts, contraction heats, heat expands and expansion cools." Is not the cycle incomplete. because of the omission of that which makes of this universe a creating or evolving one? Cold does not contract. Cold generates electric force. Electricity is the attractive force and it is electric generation which contracts. It is proper to say that expanding bodies cool and that cooling Lodies contract, but not that cold contracts. Conversely, heat does not expand. Heat radiates magnetic force. Magnetism is the separative force and it is the separative force of radiation which expands. It is proper to say that contracting bodies heat and that heating bodies expand, but not that heat expands. The complete temperature cycle is as follows : Page 242 Thus is nature repetitive in all her states of motion by her method of conducting all her opposing dimensions in cycles. The temperature of the universe is constant. Any variation of the constant is but a multiplication or division of that constant in direct or inverse universal ratios common to the variations of all dimensions according to whether the dimension is an expansion or a contraction pressure dimension. The idea conveyed by the word "heat developed," or "energy developed" or "energy generated" wherein a heretofore presumably non-existent heat, or energy, is supposed to be developed is not in accord with the laws of motion. Accelerated motion, being simply due to the decreased volume of a changed potential position, does not alter the constant of energy which produced that motion. The higher temperature of a decreased volume does not mean more heat than the lower temperature of the larger volume, of an equal mass. It means that the same constant of heat has readjusted itself to the changed potential position in accordance with the nineteenth law of motion. The constant of heat energy is the same for both volumes and both masses. Any force of the universe of dimension is an opposing pressure force. The pressure force which compresses great volume into little volume and registers the intensity of that compression in heat is the male, electropositive, genero-active, electric force of inhalation. Page 243 Inhalation is an endothermic force. That means that it is heat absorbing in the commonly accepted scientific sense. "Heat absorbing" in the true sense means gathering together the potential of resistance from a large area and compacting it into a small area of the same constant. The state of motion which produces incandescence is one in which the directions of the opposing forces are directly south and north across the pressure zones which define the orbits of floating bodies. A meteorite, for example, when attracted by this planet from its proper potential position where it floats in space, "cuts across lots" into the higher pressure zones of this planet, becoming luminous from the resistance to so disorderly an invasion of zones of higher pressure. The temperature of a meteorite increases in inverse universal ratio as it approaches the planet toward which it is falling. Increase of temperature is a contraction pressure dimension. A falling meteorite is an effect of gravitation which produces incandescence because of the rapid change of its potential position. A comet falling to the sun is almost analogous to a falling meteorite. Its potential position is such that its path evades the sun and gives it a continuous orbit which eventually ends by a plunge into high pressures near the sun, exactly as a meteorite is worn away and disappears into incandescence by the resistance of the earth's high pressures. A comet falling to its perihelion is an effect of gravitative preponderance, and one rising to its aphelion is an effect of radiative preponderance. High potential gathered together in small focus in a searchlight, for example, will cut a visible luminous streak through the low potential of the air, an incandescent path against the night sky. This streak of light reverses the negative low potential of the illuminated area, increasing its positive charge. The temperature of the path of light decreases in direct universal ratio, as the distance from its source increases. Decrease of temperature is an expansion pressure dimension. The radio-active emanations leaping violently from the sun with the explosive force due to great pressure from behind, develop incandescent streaks of light for millions of miles. These streaks of light form what is known as the corona of the sun. The violence with which they rise directly away from the sun produces a state of incandescence which disappears only when the radio-active emanations find the equilibrium pressure of their potentials and float in west to east orbits around the sun. The temperature of the corona "rays" decreases in universal ratio as their distance from the sun increases. The corona ray and hydrogen flame rising from the sun are effects of radiation, the exact opposite of that of a meteorite falling to the earth, but the reason for their incandescence is the same. Every element has its own equilibrium pressure. Therefore, every element has its own melting point. More than this, every planet of every atom has its own equilibrium pressure and, there- here- fore, also has its own melting point for its mass and for each one of its elements. The active force which compresses great volume into little volume and registers the intensity of that compression in heat is the male, electro-positive genero-active force of inhalation. The reaction force which expands little volume into large volume and registers the intensity of that expansion in cold is the female, electro-negative, radio-active, magnetic force of exhalation. Exhalation is an exothermic force. That means that it is heat releasing in the commonly accepted scientific sense. "Heat releasing" in the true sense means the redistribution of accumulation of heat over a large area, the constant being unchanged. Page 244 Page 245 When heat gathered from a large area has been compacted into a sufficiently small area to cause a violent impact of opposite pressures seeking equilibrium, a state of motion is produced known as luminosity or incandescence. The nearer the equalition of increasing pressures, the greater the luminosity. The vortex of any system is always luminous. It matters not whether the system is of low potential and pressure opposition or of high potential and pressure opposition, there is always a sufficient pressure opposition at the vortex to cause a state of incandescence. It must be remembered that the melting point of low potential is correspondingly low and that melting points rise as opposing pressures increase. The state of violent motion which produces incandescence at the nucleus of the hydrogen atom is as relatively violent as the state of motion which produces incandescence in the sun of the carbon atom or the sun of our solar system. The law for little mass being the same as for big mass, it follows that each planet in this solar system must have its own melting point as a mass, and its own relative standard unit melting points for every sub-division of its mass. The opposing pressures which would melt a mass of zinc into a liquid, for example, would not even affect the rigidity of a mass of carborundum. It can readily be seen, therefore, that a temperature which would be extremely hot to the mass of zinc would be but a warm breath to the mass of carborundum. It is these relative temperatures, densities and pressures which lead us to form wrong conclusions regarding the relative temperatures, densities and pressures of the planets of this system. The relatively expanded mass of this planet could not stand the heat of the pressure zone in which Mercury floats. This planet would become a molten ball in Mercury's orbit whereas Mercury's rigidity is hardly affected by it. On each planet of this system, the degrees of heat and cold measured in their own relative standard units are so varying that one cannot judge of conditions on any other body when measured by standards common to this body. On Mars we see polar ice caps and we assume that the temperature must drop below the 32° to which we are accustomed as the freezing point of water, in order that the ice caps could be possible. As a matter of fact water on Mars would not freeze at 32°. It would require a very much lower temperature. An atmosphere which would be too cold for us to survive would be comfortably warm for Martians. We see the red fire spots of Jupiter and assume by our standard units of heat that Jupiter must be very hot whereas on the contrary, it is relatively very cold. The heat of a flame at the surface of Jupiter would be below the freezing point of water on this planet. The rings of Saturn, judged by our standard units of density, are presumed to be composed of solid substances like what are commonly known to us as boulders. The rings of Saturn are composed of solid masses but the solidity of Saturn's rings would be as a heavy smoky vapor to us. The outermost planets of this system and the nebulae beyond them are of so much lower pressure equilibriums that states of incandescence which would be extremely hot for their potentials would be colder than liquid air to us. Page 246 Page 247 It does not require much imagination to visualize a condition of relative heat on the planet Neptune when one considers that hydrogen freezes into a rigid solid in the ordinary temperature of Neptune whereas on this planet its freezing point is —250° C. It is perhaps. difficult to realize that substances sufficiently solid to be used as building materials on one planet would be liquids and vapors on another. The very bricks and iron beams we use in our structures would be but liquids to the inhabitants of Mercury. Conversely, frail substances to us would become the staunchest of building materials to the possible inhabitants of Saturn or Uranus. On this planet we should not dream of building our houses of ice below the arctic circle. We fail to realize, however, that our staunch houses of stone and iron are but the ices of those substances, the only difference being that the melting points of the ices with which we build are so much higher than the normal temperature of this planet, that they are to us as dependable solids as the ice of water is to the eskimo. All of our dependable solids are but the ices of various substances of varying states of dependability, their dependability being conditioned by their own separate locked potential positions. By a study of the table of the elements in Chapter VI. one will see that the melting point of the inert gas at the beginning of the fifth octave is — 271° C. whereas the melting point of the substance in the first tone is +186° C., that of the second tone +1280° C., the third +2350° C. and the double tone +3600° C. Going back down the negative side of the scale, the melting point of the substance in the third tone is —210° C., that of the second —218° C., the first — 223° C. and the master tone — 271° C. In every octave, the melting points rise and fall in an orderly manner as pressures increase in their opposition and relax from that opposition. In the mid-tones alone are there any irregularities in the orderliness of increase and decrease, but mid-tones are characteristically irregular in all of their dimensions. This does not mean that mid-tonal irregularities are exceptions to the law. It simply means that mid- tones are split-tones and the totals of all dimensions of all the split-tones in any octave are the constant of the double tone of that octave. In temperature, as in all other dimensions, the variation of heat which gives us what we call higher temperature is merely a preponderance of heat at the expense of its opposite dimension, cold. The constant of energy in all of its expressions is equal in every tone of every octave, the mid-tones between each tone counting as one tone. All variations of temperature are, therefore, but variations of the opposites of dimension. All variations of dimension are orderly, and in universal ratios. The relative temperatures of the planets of this solar system are as much in conformity With the universal ratios upon which the formula of the locked potentials is based, as the temperatures of the various elements are in conformity with their law. Without the variation of temperature in systems and the masses of systems, nature could not produce her effects of form, but she makes no variation in one opposite of any system without balancing that variation in the opposite dimension of an opposite system. With all of the conditions governing the variation of temperature, standard units of temperature, like all other dimensions, are purely relative and must change to suit every changed condition. One cannot, for example, give the melting point of aluminum as 659° C. as fixed and unchanging under all conditions. Page 248 A pressure of 1,000 pounds surrounding the metal would so change conditions that it would still remain frozen at a much higher point than 659° C. Conversely, by heating it in a vacuum, it would melt at a very much lower point. We, therefore, cannot set our standard units of temperature to conditions prevailing in the sun or any of the planets and the only way to find the true temperatures existing upon the various masses of this solar system, is to calculate them by universal ratios and set them down as a table of standard units of temperature for each separate mass. If variation of temperature varies the apparent ability of mass to attract and to repel then the temperature dimension should be taken into consideration in writing the laws of gravitation and radiation. Page 249 CONTENTS CHAPTER XIX EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION COLOR-THE FIFTEENTH DIMENSION Every effect of motion is recorded by nature in as substantial a manner as a business man records his inventory and without chance of human error. As man records his facts with pen and ink in ledger volumes, so does nature record her effects of motion with light in octave volumes. Every effect of motion differs from every other-effect of motion and is recorded with a preponderance of one or the other of the many colors of light. Light is the universal language. The colors of light are the letters of the alphabet. Combinations of the letters of light are the words of the language of light. Simple effects of motion are simple words of few letters. Complex effects of motion are complex sentences and paragraphs with long words of many letters. Every effect of motion is cumulative and repeative within its accumulation. Every effect of motion in any octave is repeated in sequence in the various speeds of every other octave. A simple effect of motion, such as hydrogen, is written in the language of light in simple words of simple letters, for its history is brief. Hydrogen (401+) has within it the short• history of its accumulation of only three preceding octaves. The spectrum of hydrogen is preponderantly red and that preponderance is recorded dominantly in one bright line of red, and less conspicuously in three other lines of red which indicate similar positions (301 +, 201+ and 101 +) of lower potential through which it passed in preceding octaves. On the contrary, the spectrum of a complex state of motion such as iron is written in the language of light in complex paragraphs, of long, involved and complex sentences, words and phrases. The spectrum of iron is preponderantly orange-yellow. That preponderance is recorded dominantly in its octave line and less conspicuously in six other lines of orange-yellow which indicate similar positions of lower potential through which it passed in preceding octaves. The history of hydrogen as compared to that of iron is like the history of a three year old child as compared with that of a Napoleon. All effects of motion absorb light and give forth light. To absorb light is to decelerate its reproductive speed. To decelerate light is to generate it by lengthening its reproductive intervals. To generate light is to draw it closer to its gravitative center. The ability to draw light closer to its gravitative center is the measure of its ability to attract. To give forth light is to accelerate its reproductive speed. To accelerate light is to radiate it by shortening its reproductive intervals. To radiate light is to expel it from its radiative center. The ability to expel light from its radiative center is the measure of its ability to repel. Page 250 All states of motion which are preponderant in their ability to attract record their preponderance on the red side of the spectrum. All states of motion which are preponderant in their ability to repel record their preponderance on the blue side of the spectrum. If these premises are well founded it must necessarily follow that the record of states of motion in color must be related to the attraction of gravitation and to the repulsion of radiation. All light is a complexity of all colors. That most remarkable of instruments known as the spectroscope separates light into its various colors. The spectroscope also separates different effects of motion into their separate colors. When man invented the spectroscope, he made the greatest stride toward solving the mysteries of nature by thus being able to write down her language in letters of light. The effects of motion revealed by the spectroscope, show the cumulative history of each separate state of motion written within itself. There should be no difficulty in writing a complete history of states of motion which will lead clearly to the .very door of the Holy of Holies. The unseen universe of the first three octaves and the greater part of the fourth is clearly written in hydrogen and helium. It is quite clearly recorded in the discharging elements, nickel, mercury and tungsten. It is more clearly recorded in manganese, iron, molybdenum, rhodium, ruthenium, titanium, vanadium, zirconium and other predominantly male charging elements in which the resistance to integration assists man in writing down their history in the language of light. It will require a volume in itself to rewrite a spectrum analysis in the universal language of light. Suffice it for this volume of first principles merely to suggest perhaps a more logical and workable electro-magnetic basis for this physical universe of dimension. As each and every element is not a separate substance but a variation of the One substance, so is it also not an apparent separate state of motion but a variation of many states of motion. All of the states of motion which go to make up any element are within that element. Octave waves of low potential of which the elements are tones are within octave waves of high potential. Within helium is the history of its growth. Helium is a master-tone and helium itself is therefore devoid of spectrum lines of its own. The three red lines of helium are the antecedents of hydrogen in octaves of the "unseen" universe, and other prominent lines tell the story of the six empty spaces which follow hydrogen. Consider the spectrum analysis of iron, for example. One can see at a glance the lines which belong to iron and those which tell its recent and remote history. More important still, one can tell by their positions whether they represent the relative ability of the iron atom to charge or to discharge. Any other attribute of the states of motion which are assembled into that state of motion which we designate as iron is as clearly recorded in its spectrum as the words on this page. One would have no difficulty whatsoever in recognizing the line of wave length 7817.2 as belonging to iron and 7392.3 as recent history and 6944.8 as extremely remote history. To facilitate the better reading of the language of light, herein follows a partial list of lines whose wave lengths belong to iron or to its immediate raid-tone associates, and also other lists indicating its recent and its more remote history. Page 251 The division of the visible spectrum into several thousand lines, each one of which is different in its shade of color and in its plane from every other, and of the invisible spectrum into thousands. of other lines, tells in its own convincing manner that this universe of varying motion is a universe of varying pressures. By the "visible" spectrum, we mean that portion of the spectrum which can be detected by the evidence of human sight. Great portions of the heretofore "invisible" spectrum are now detected by the bolometer and by the photograph negative. Every state of motion is indicated by its own particular color line, exactly as it is indicated by its own degrees of temperature, plane and pressure. Color is one of the great dimensions by means of which we will be enabled to measure the potential positions of states of motion which man will soon need to reproduce for the continuance of his very existence. The spectrum begins at the 0= position of the inertial plane with an absence of color. The beginning of resistance to integration is indicated in both directions by ultra-violet. On the positive side of the wave, as genera active pressures increase, the violet merges into an infra red, then quickly into red, orange-red, orange and the yellow of north. On the negative side of the wave, as radioactive pressures increase, the ultra violet merges into violet, then slowly into blue, greenish blue, green and the yellow of north. Yellow is the meeting point of highest pressures, temperatures, densities and potentials of the wave. From yellow the 4 position in the wave pressure walls are tonally erected back through the color pressure positions to the disappearance of color in the inertial plane. Color therefore, like temperature, is an indicator of a state of motion and has no existence other than an appearance of existence. As the condition and potential position of all mass can be determined by such dimensions as its plane, pressure and temperature, so also can its condition be determined by the colors which it is able to generate and radiate. All mass is both generative and radiative. All mass indicates its ability to generate by the color pressures indicated by genero-active lines on the red side of the spectrum, and its ability to radiate by radio-active lines on the blue side of the spectrum. The preponderance of color lines of a mass is indicative of its potential position in its wave. A preponderance of red or orange indicates that a mass is on the outward journey toward the north, and a preponderance of green or blue indicates that a mass is on the return journey to plane. Charging systems; therefore, are preponderantly recorded in the red end of the spectrum and discharging systems are preponderantly recorded in the blue end. Page 252 • There are many evidences which seem to contradict this law in the spectrum lines of some of the positive elements but this contradiction is an illusion, similar to the illusion of perspective, and easily comprehensible. The most outstanding of these apparent contradictions is the characteristic yellow D line of sodium. If sodium were perfectly consistent with the law, its red line should be prominent and its yellow line weak, instead of which they are the reverse. The explanation is simple. Sodium (601 +) is the first positive tone of the sixth octave. At the fifth octave the super-inhalation of the cycle ends with its maximum of pressure. In sodium, therefore, at the beginning of the super-exhalation, the intense accumulated pressures of inhalation cause so great a storm of contraction that sodium registers her overtone in preponderance to her true tone. One may more easily understand this situation by drawing in a full breath, holding it in suspense for a moment and then releasing it. The pressure at the moment of release is great. A perfect analogy is that of the old-fashioned church organ in which the controls are not sufficiently adjusted to prevent a pipe from sounding its overtone instead of its true tone when the boy who pumps the bellows suddenly becomes over vigorous. This plus effect in sodium is counterbalanced, as all effects of motion are always counterbalanced, by exactly opposite minus effects in the corresponding positions 701+, 801+ and 901+ of the following three octaves. In potassium (701+), even though the proper red preponderance is recorded, sodium's -off- setting discharge sweeps down through the blue side of the spectrum in a wave of increasing and decreasing intensity, ending suddenly in an intense line far down toward the violet. In rubidium (801+), even though its own red preponderance and the history of its evolution is well recorded, sodium's offsetting discharge sweeps less far down through the blue side of the spectrum. Its wave of increasing and decreasing intensity ends in two blue lines of vigorous discharge, one of which belongs to rubidium itself, the other of which is history. In caesium (901 +) sodium's offsetting discharge becomes equalized. The spectrum of any element can only be obtained when that element is in a state of incandescence, which necessitates an increase of radiative, expansive pressure. This fact has much also to do with the recording of the overtone of sodium instead of the true tone. In the sun, for example, sodium is under tremendously high pressure but upon this planet it is under low pressure. By subjecting it to a state of incandescence, its pressures become super-normal. There is a great difference of opinion as to the direction in which evolution is proceeding, whether from the direction of white stars into the orange and red stages, or whether the colored stars are younger and will become white with increasing age. The red stars are the younger. They evolve through orange and yellow to their white of maturity in the north apices of their cones. White in maximum motion is a reflection of white in inertia. When degeneration begins, first green and then blue predominate. They are ageing. It must be constantly borne in mind that standard units of pressures, and other dimensions in a potential position such as that of the sun, expand and contract to fit the standard units of measurements on this planet. Therefore all pressure color lines that are visible in the high pressures of the sun expand in the same ratios when recorded in our planet's lower pressures, so that when so recorded they maintain their same relative positions. Page 253 Also it must be constantly borne in mind that increasing pressures are recorded nearer to the yellow, so that lines of consecutive octaves of increasingly higher potential record themselves in the direction of yellow. If, therefore, yellow by the way of red is in the generative direction of north by the way of east, and violet by the way of blue is in the radiative direction of south by the way of west, pressure color lines must, in some manner, be related to the attraction of gravitation and the repulsion of radiation. If the red side of the spectrum indicates a contracting state of genero-active preponder' ance, it must necessarily follow that all masses which record the red side in preponderance are electro-positive and preponderantly attractive. Their preponderant dimensions are plus. If the blue side of the spectrum indicates an expanding state of radioactive preponderance, it must necessarily follow that all masses which record the blue side in preponderance are electro-negative and preponderantly repellent. Their preponderant dimensions are minus. Every photographer is familiar with the effect of the absorption of light by red, orange and yellow, for these colors always translate their values darker than their constants. Conversely, green, blue and violet, which are preponderantly light emitting always translate their values lighter than their constants. If the red side is contractive, generative and attractive then red systems must be adolescent. If the blue side is expansive, radiative and repellent, then blue systems must be senescent. If the above premises are well founded and the color of a state of motion indicates the condition or potential of that state of motion, then color is as dependable a dimension as miles, feet and inches, or degrees of temperature and plane. If color is as dependable a dimension as distance, temperature and other dependable dimensions, color should therefore be considered in the writing of the law of gravitation and radiation. Page 254 CONTENTS CHAPTER XX EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION UNIVERSAL MECHANICS-ROTATION-REVOLUTION MASS-PLANE THE TWELFTH, THIRTEENTH, FOURTEENTH AND SIXTEENTH DIMENSIONS In considering and comparing man's methods with nature's, let us first be reminded of the fact that the process of thinking out all idea is universal. Man has no other manner of thinking out his idea than has the universal One. The inner Mind is not another kind of Mind. Mind is universal. Therefore, there can be no two manners or methods or processes of thinking. Exactly as there can be no two separate ways of thinking, one for man and one for God, so also can there be no two separate sets of principles or methods of constructing the ideas evolved by man and God in thinking. The mechanics of the universal One are the mechanics of man. The universal One is the great architect and engineer. Man can not transcend His principles nor discover new ones unknown to Him. Man, the architect, designs supposedly new plan of effecting this purpose and the mechanical processes adopted by her in transforming her concepts of form into their appearances of reality in motion. Nature's processes are clearly visualized in the various simple effects and periodicities with which we are perfectly familiar. It is only necessary to co-ordinate these effects in their orderly sequences by putting them together part by part, in order to clearly comprehend this vast but simple plan. We are too prone to take various effects singly without coordinating them, or, if we take effects in groups, we are too prone to stop there without attempting to trace them back to their common beginning and ahead to their common ending. Take for example, the orbits of our planets. We measure them and study them as orbits, but there we stop. The most careful study and charting of orbits alone accomplishes nothing. We must trace back to the beginning and follow on to the ending every stage of the journey to and from mass of which these orbits are but a part. By thus going back and charting the states of motion of this solar system as indicative of relative positions in their common journey, these orbits and their eccentricities will have a different meaning for us. The purpose of nature is to produce and to reproduce the ideas thought out by the image making faculty of universal Mind. Mind creates that which Mind thinks. Page 255 To produce and to reproduce idea in form, or in other words to quicken the concept with what we call "life," motion must be given to the universal Mind substance, out of which the form of all idea is born. Inertia overcome by the energy Of motion always ends in mass. Mass is the pigment with which nature paints all of her pictures with their illusions of dimension, upon the cosmic canvas of the inertial plane. From the concept of form to the perfection of form as represented in the sphere, the perfection of orbit as represented in the true circle, the perfection of plane of motion as represented in the angle of 90° to the inertial planes, is a progressive cycle through imperfection in all of these effects. Let us then begin this magic and ecstatic journey of creating things. Let us trace the evolution of true circles through the ellipses. Let us trace the evolution of the sphere from the shapeless ovoid through the whirling stages of oblateness to the perfection of true sphere. Let us trace the evolution of volume from the plane of no dimension into mass. Let us trace the evolution of plane itself through wide angles of ecliptic expansion to the one plane of perfect gyroscopic motion. Let us trace the evolution of opposing dimensions of increasing and decreasing temperatures, volumes, densities, and all other sex expressions from the beginning of sex opposition in the wide expanse of south to the melding sex in the bi-sexual contracted point of no and back again. Let us not forget that this universe of form is but a contraction of the concept of idea into the form of the idea. Form eventually expands into disappearance but is eternally continuous as idea. All effects of motion are sequential contractions of centripetal, generative force which' compose mass by attracting it, and expansion' of centrifugal radiative force which decompose mass by repelling it. Let us draw a mental picture of a "quantity" of energy representing the constant of the vase? wave of which the solar system is a part and: let us mark off the harmonic circle of this wave on the south inertial planes of the cubes of motion. It will be remembered that the volume of the constant is represented by two opposed cones, the altitudes of which have been marked off by the electric pole at the intersection of the three inertial planes of the cubes of motion. These marked off altitudes represent the limitations of expansion of the wave. The center of each harmonic base is also the apex of the opposing cone. Imagine, then, the two opposing cones for each wave intersecting so that each apex meets the apex of another cone at the centre of the magnetic base of its opposite. This is the position of the cones of energy in concept as simultaneously marked off throughout the universe. This is the position of the opposing male-female, positive-negative cones of energy at the beginning and at the ending of every effect of motion as expressed in the wave before inertia has been overcome by motion and after motion has been conquered by inertia. This is the position of the opposing cones of energy in the dimensionless universe of inertia. This is the birth of energy in man's "spiritual" universe. The transition to man's "physical" universe of solids of matter can now be easily visualized by imagining the gradual contraction of each electric pole to the points of north at the overtones of each wave. Page 256 Page 257 Visualize this transition and note its happenings. The constant of dimensions of the magnetic bases cannot change with changing dimensions for they mark the extension of the wave. There fore, as the axes of the cones contract and the contours of the cones sequentially expand until they disappear into the one plane of their bases, the planes of the magnetic bases are transferred to the equators of forming masses, which, added together, equal the constant of the-whole. The constant of dimensions of the electric poles cannot change with changing dimensions for they . mark-the volume, or expansion dimensions of the wave. Therefore, as the axes of the cones contract, the altitudes of the contracting cones are transferred to the poles of rotation of forming masses which, added together, equal the constant of the whale. Observe then that energy in concept inertia is expressed by magnetic base of cone meeting magnetic base, and apex of cone meeting apex at the south inertial plane of the cubes of motion. Observe also that energy in motion is expressed by the disappearance of cones, by apex and base melding with apex and base at the ecliptic planes of the cubes of motion through the contraction of the electric poles. The entire gamut of all effects of motion is run during this process of the contraction of the opposing electric poles to a point of disappearance in mass, and the expansion of the magnetic bases from the inertial planes of non-motion to the ecliptic planes of maximum motion and the consequent disappearance of cones in mass. During this process the point of north draws the design of the wave in a spiral line from the centers to the corners of the cubes of motion. Through contraction of the electric poles, centripetal force is born in the inertial plane and is increased in force in whirling masses which are contracting with the contraction of the poles of the opposing cones of motion as they near the apices of those cones on their outward journey to mass, and is decreased in force as they return to plane. Through contraction of the electric poles, centrifugal force is born in the inertial plane and is increased in force until that plane has gyrated unsteadily to its overtone position of maximum contraction at the point of north of the cubes of motion on its outward journey to mass and is decreased in force as it returns to plane. Although centripetal force is preponderant on the outward journey to mass from 0= to 4+ in the + positive half of the wave, centrifugal force increases in excess of centripetal force until the former overtakes and counterbalances the latter at the overtone of the wave. This is in conformity with the fact that negative discharge increases as positive charge increases until the former overtakes the latter and the power of disintegration exceeds that of integration, causing dissipation of accumulated energy. This is also in conformity with the fact that the force of radiation increases as the force of gravitation increases until the former overtakes the latter and dominates the wave. Conversely, although centrifugal force is preponderant on the return journey to plane from 4t to 0= in the negative half of the wave, centrifugal force decreases in excess of centripetal force until the latter overtakes the former at the harmonic of the wave.
