---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 13 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 13

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 13 of 15
**Words**: ~7,397
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

This is in conformity with the fact that negative discharge decreases as positive charge decreases until the latter overtakes the former and integration again exceeds disintegration, causing the wave to repeat itself. Page 258 Page 259 This is also in conformity with the fact that the force of radiation decreases as the force of gravitation decreases until the latter overtakes the former and supplies the impetus for overcoming inertia in the repetition of the expression of the same constant of energy in a new wave. This is the process of formation of mass, its dissolution and its repetition by means of the wave, for every expression of energy. This is the genero-active process of production and reproduction, or creation, of any of the ideas of Mind, and the radio-active process of their dissipation or dissolution into but the memory of those ideas. The effect in relation to plane has been a gradual contraction and the building up of opposing pressure walls of increasing potential in ever shortening cones. Another effect in relation to plane has been to overcome its inertia and set it in motion. The force of motion toward plane is always toward south by way of west and is therefore centrifugal. The effect in relation to volume of the cones has been a division into separately, whirling masses. The effect in regard to the cones of energy has been their transference to mass, within which they continue their office of opposing and of alternating conquest on the journey from plane to mass and back again to plane. When apex meets apex at the center of the magnetic bases within masses, then the outward journey is completed. At this point, sex meets sex in a bi-sexual union at the true point of north where both revolution and rotation disappear. The force of motion away from plane is always toward north by the way of east and is therefore centripetal. When apex meets apex at the center of the magnetic bases of south inertial planes then is the return journey completed. The contraction of the generative cones ends at the electric poles and is the effect of centripetal force. The expansion of the radiative cones ends at the ecliptic plane and is the effect of centrifugal force. The gradual contraction of the two opposing and intersecting cones into their disappearance in one plane causes all substance forced in the direction of the two vortices to whirl in the ever shortening spiral orbits and ever increasing pressures of the electric stream. The same cause forces all substance expelled from the contracted north to whirl in the ever lengthening spiral orbits and lessening pressures of the magnetic stream. The contracting electric centripetal stream is the condition of motion necessary to produce that effect of motion which we call the attraction of gravitation. The expanding, magnetic, centrifugal stream is the condition of motion necessary to produce that effect of motion which we call the repulsion of radiation. The electric stream and the magnetic stream are one. They are but travelling in different directions. The electric stream is travelling toward the apex of a cone in the ever contracting direction of the outward journey to mass, and the magnetic stream is travelling toward the base of a cone in the ever expanding direction of the return journey to plane. Each stream is forever passing and following the other as the degeneration or regeneration of it. The electric stream of contraction is the plus force which ends in mass. The magnetic stream of expansion is the minus force which ends in plane. Page 260 Page 261 Both forces, intensify toward north and build unstable and opposing tonal pressure walls which become stable and reproductive by their union at the point of north. Both forces meet in reproductive union in equal high intensities in the double tone at the bisexual plane of north. There remains but one more effect of which to make careful note in order to completely visualize the mechanics of motion of both the outward journey from plane to mass and the return journey to plane. As the axes of the opposing cones of energy contract and their contours expand, the apices of the cones of energy bend gradually away from the inertial junctions to the corners of the cubes of motion. Thus spiral Waves are formed and all spiral motion is born. Thus is eccentricity of orbit a necessary stage in the evolution of perfection of orbit. Thus is the ellipse a necessary stake in the evolution of the circle. Thus is the unsteady gyration of precessional motion of expanded plane in all mass a necessary stage in the evolution of perfection of gyroscopic motion in one plane. Thus is the amorphous and irregular crystal a necessary stage in the evolution of the perfect cubic crystal. Thus are the polar surfaces of all masses the regions of transference of the inertial cold of non- motion, and the equators the regions of transference of the resistant heat of maximum motion. Thus is the concept of energy in the one point of north in inertia divided into its opposites of expression in sex in the appearance of two points of north at the overtones of every wave in order that the dimensionless universe of simultaneity in inertia may become a universe of dimension with sequential intervals of reproduction of its productions. Thus does the sexlessness of inertia become bisexual in its reflection in motion. It will be remembered that the harmonic circle of a wave is its magnetic base which when transferred to mass, is the ecliptic of the wave and of every sub-division of the wave. It will be remembered that when the electric pole of a wave is reflected in accumulated mass, it ends in the gravitative center of the mass and of every sub-division of the mass. There is but one electric pole and one magnetic base of unchanging constants to the volume of every wave. When the entire volume of a wave as measured out by pole and plane is transferred to separate masses through motion, the electric pole and magnetic base is reflected in every whirling sub-division of that volume. In every wave the constant of its cone volume in inertia is the constant of the volume of all masses in motion within the wave. The position of the charging poles represents the increase of electric force. This increase is in the direction of north at the overtone of the wave, and toward the reflections of north at the gravitative centers of all masses of the wave. The expansion of the magnetic base represents the increase of magnetic force. This increase is in the direction of south at the harmonic plane of the wave, and toward the reflection of that harmonic plane in the ecliptic areas of all masses of the wave. The contraction of the charging poles represents the generative force which expresses its conquest over the magnetic force by the contraction of area of orbit, by deceleration of rotation and acceleration of revolution of individual masses. The expansion of the magnetic base represents the degenerative force which expresses its conquest over the electric force by expansion of orbital area, by acceleration of rotation and by deceleration of revolution of individual masses. Page 262 The electric pole of generation gathers separately moving masses together into the bound energy of rigid bodies by the mutual force of attraction of charging bodies and gives to each mass of the wave a portion of itself. Electricity then expresses its ultimate conquest of magnetism by a reversal in mass of its original desire for action through motion and simulates the desire of magnetism for non-motion. The magnetic base of degeneration expresses its ultimate conquest of electricity by actively asserting its repellent force. It more vigorously pries apart the bound energy stored in mass by its preponderance of centrifugal force. Magnetism then expresses its ultimate conquest of electricity by a reversal in mass of its original desire for inaction and simulates the desire of electricity for motion. Electricity starts the outward journey from non-motion to mass with intense motion, ends with non- motion and then transfers its energy to assist magnetism on the return journey. Conversely, magnetism starts the outward journey from non-motion to mass with intense opposition to motion, ends with non-motion and begins the return journey with intense motion. Magnetism is overtaken on the return journey to plane by the intense speed of low potential, the impetus of which causes its regeneration on the positive side of the inertial plane. The speed-time dimension of the magnetic return exactly equals the power-time dimension of the electric start. Each of the opposing forces conquers the other by simulating the desire of the other. Thus does this universe of more and less alternate between the more and the less, by exchange of the balances of power and speed from one to the other. Thus is all motion characterized by oscillation. Thus is all oscillation decelerated from the trillions per second in small mass to the one in centuries in big mass. Thus does power-time conquer speed-time by absorbing its speed, and speed-time conquer power- time by dissipating its power. Thus does the preponderantly male accumulate the female in each oscillation until eventually the female is preponderant. Thus does the preponderantly red end of the spectrum accumulate the blue, until the blue end is preponderant in violet. Thus do all effects of motion alternate in preponderance as each opposite force conquers the other by yielding to its desire. For a concrete example of one of these effects, let us consider the four inner planets of our solar system which are sufficiently expanded in relation to each other to revolve and rotate freely, in accordance with the rule that bodies moving in inner orbits revolve faster and rotate slower than do those of outer orbits. If these four planets had been heated together and set out to cool as one solid mass, each mass forming concentric rings or shells one around the other, their power-time conditions in revolution would be reversed in rotation. Mercury revolves at about twenty-nine miles per second and circles the sun four times to the earth's once. Venus moves about twenty-two miles per second and circles the sun more than twice to the earth's once. The earth revolves about eighteen miles each second. Mars slows down to fifteen miles and takes nearly two years to complete one circuit of the sun. Page 263 The process of generation of mass reverses this order in rotation. Consider for example, the earth as a contracted complex rigid solid. A mass on its surface at the equator rotates about one thousand miles per hour. A mass one thousand miles below the surface rotates about seven hundred and fifty miles per hour. A thousand miles deeper and the speed is but five hundred miles. Three thousand miles down the speed reduces to two hundred and fifty miles per hour and at four thousand miles practically ceases. In any mass the speed of rotation of bound energy increases in the direct universal ratio from the gravitative center of force. In any system the speed of revolution of separated equal masses of bound energy revolving in the same plane, decreases in the inverse universal ratio from the center of force. In any system accelerated revolution increases power-time dimension and accelerated rotation increases speed-time dimension. In any mass decelerated rotation increases power-time dimension and decelerated revolution increases speed-time dimension. In any mass or system the decrease in rotation or revolution is in inverse universal ratio and is balanced by a corresponding increase of the opposite effect in direct ratio. When opposing forces conquer each other by simulating each other's attributes in motion they also simulate each other's mathematical ratios of increase and decrease. There is but one force and when each apparent opposite exchanges attributes of motion, it exchanges ratios in conformity with these changes. The difference is only a difference in the appearance of form in mass due to contraction or expansion, and in time dimension due to a reversal of ratios. Never for one moment does the appearance of form in mass escape from the governing plane of the reality of form in concept in inertia. Plane follows mass, governs mass and effects its evolution. Plane eventually dominates mass and controls it till its dissolution. Mass is stored energy, bound into form as potential energy. To be stored, energy must be frozen into a dense, rigid solid. Mass, in freezing, must radiate its heat. Radiation cools. Radiation is preponderant where expanding magnetic bases meet at the ecliptic planes of masses. Where magnetic bases meet each other in mass the speed of rotation is at its maximum. Cooling mass contracts. Contraction is preponderant where charging poles intersect ecliptic planes at the gravitative centers of all masses. At gravitative centers, the speed of rotation disappears and revolution increases. Both of these effects of motion are expressions of power-time, increasing positive charge and increasing potential. Generation expresses its conquest over radiation through resistance to the magnetic force as expressed in decelerated rotation and accelerated revolution. Radiation expresses its conquest over generation through resistance to the electric forces as expressed in accelerated rotation and decelerated revolution. The final conquest of electricity is at the true point of north where both accelerated revolution and decelerated rotation end in non-motion at the end of the outward journey to mass. Page 264 At this point the charging poles equalize preparatory to their reversal. In this bi-sexual position the appearance of stability in motion-in-opposition has reached its maximum. The final conquest of magnetism is at the inertial plane of south where both decelerated revolution and accelerated rotation end in non-motion at the end of the return journey to plane. It will be remembered that electricity desires the accumulation of energy into rigid bodies of non- motion, and expresses that desire through resistance to a force established by itself and opposed by magnetism. It will be remembered that magnetism opposes motion but is forced to react equally to every electric action of induced motion. It will, therefore, be seen that the composition and decomposition of mass is but a series of alternate electric conquests over magnetism, followed by magnetic conquests over electricity. Electric conquest, through motion which ends in a simulation of non-motion, results in the appearance of rigid bodies. Electricity winds the cosmic clock to its ultimate binding point at the point of north where force unites with force to create a dead center of non-force. Magnetic conquest, through motion which ends in a simulation of non-motion, results in the disappearance of rigid bodies. Magnetism unwinds the cosmic clock to its ultimate releasing point at the plane of south where force departs from force to create a dead center of non-force. Through motion electricity simulates the stability of inertia and also through motion magnetism re- attains the real stability of inertia. Rigid bodies are relatively cool contracted bodies. Rigid masses of stored energy are accumulations of expanded masses into contracted masses, the decrease of rotation of which has been transformed to a corresponding increase in revolution. Nebulous masses of discharging potential are released accumulations which reverse the order of their revolution and rotation as they expand and separate into more simple masses of lower potential. Charging bodies are those which are transferring the constant of their speed-time in revolution to power-time in rotation. Discharging bodies are those which are exchanging the constant of their power-time in rotation to speed time in revolution. If the foregoing premises are correct in principle, then the four dimensions, rotation, revolution, mass and plane must be related to the attraction or gravitation and the repulsion of radiation. Let us now consider each of these dimensions separately, ever bearing in mind that all mass is formed from within itself and that, as a consequence, the increase in any gravitative effect is accompanied by an increase in a radiative effect in opposite directions of the same ratio. More positive charge in a mass does not mean less negative discharge. Greater ability to attract does not mean less ability to repel. Each opposite effect simultaneously increases and decreases its preponderance until one overtakes the other and assumes the preponderance of the other 'in passing. This is the basic principle of mass formation and deformation. The formless universe of thinking Mind is an inert universe of the real stability of non motion imbued with a desire to overcome inertia through motion. Page 265 The universe of form in mass is the gyroscopic expression of the desire of thinking Mind to give form to the ideas of Mind; and to overcome motion by inertia in order to regain its lost stability. When motion overcomes inertia it stimulates the stability of inertia in the gyroscopic, gravitational points of north which are developed in every creating form of thinking Mind. When inertia overcomes motion it simulates form by recording it in inertia. The record of the idea of Mind in inertia is the eternal soul of that idea. Idea is forever recorded in soul in inertia and repeated in form of mass in motion. No idea of Mind ever began or ever ended. Page 266 CONTENTS CHAPTER XXI EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION ROTATION—THE TWELFTH DIMENSION Many theories have been advanced regarding the cause of rotation of mass. It is generally assumed that mass has been given an original impetus which keeps it in motion. The cause of rotation is extremely simple and not shrouded in mystery. All mass is constantly changing its potential. It, therefore, must change its position as its potential is changed, for every potential has its own place or position in this universe of dimension. Let us recall a basic law : "That which is generated must be radiated." Planets generate in preponderance north and south of their Cancer-Capricorn belts on their day light hemispheres. Planets preponderantly radiate in preponderance at the boundaries of their ecliptic expansions and on their dark hemispheres. To generate means to contract from within. The generative portion of a planet pulls against the spiral lines of force and thus retards motion in that direction. To radiate means to expand, expel or repel from within. The radiative portion of a planet pushes against the spiral lines of force and thus accelerates rotation. In a high potential position, the opposed pressures which caused that high potential are more equally distributed over the entire surface of the mass. At the overtone of the wave, where all planets are true spheres, the ability to generate and to radiate is equally distributed over the entire area of each planet. As the potential of a mass diminishes, the ability to generate confines its activity more closely to the area surrounding its charging poles and decreases in intensity in the direction of its equator. When our sun, for example, has reached its overtone position at the north point of the wave, its radioactivity will have overtaken its genero-activity. The corona of the sun will then be as prominent at the poles as at the equator. The charging poles will then coincide with the pole of rotation. Conversely, the genero-activity of the sun will be as great at the equator as at the poles. The ecliptic will then coincide with the equator. There will be no ecliptic expansion. The equatorial belt of the sun will then be as rigid as the polar regions, and sun spots will be confined to the plane of the equator until they entirely disappear. The generative position of a -planet is the charging portion. It is regenerative. It is endothermic, or heat absorbing. The radiative portion of a planet is the discharging portion. It is degenerative. It is exothermic or heat releasing. Page 267 That which is being drawn into a planet from within is an opposing force. Its effect is opposite to the effect of the force of that which is being expelled from a planet. Celestial mechanics employ these two forces to keep the wheels of nature revolving. Nature sets these two forces one against the other in a manner which man would do well to more closely emulate. Nature always directs her force against a tangent and continues it without a break. Nature accumulates her power to its high explosive, high pressure, high temperature and high potential position and then regenerates it over and over again until every last particle of it has performed work on its way to dissolution. Consider the solar system, for an example of universal economy. The sun represents the accumulation of generated energy which runs the wheels of this particular atom of the universal machine. The sun is the storage battery of this solar system. The explosive radio-active emanations from the sun are regenerated in a continuous stream by impact against the inertial plane of her nearest planet. From the inertial plane its motion is continued by a regenerative positive force pulling from within the planet in a spiral, tangential direction. Mercury uses what it needs of this power and passes it on by expelling it from within in a greater tangential direction. One after the other the intake of each planet absorbs the regenerated exhaust of the previous one and passes it on from planet to planet in an ever increasing tangential direction, until all the power of the primary explosion has been utilized to perform the work of giving form to the idea of universal thinking. No power is wasted_ All of the exhaust energy of the sun passes along the lines of its ecliptic expansion as bound energy confined within pressure walls, as truly as the exhaust energy of an explosion in -a. cylinder head passes within the walls of the cylinder of man's machine. The radiation of the sun does not pass into space in a casual manner. It is directed toward the south by the way of west and within the limits of its own ecliptic area which is approximately 16°. Consider the mechanics of man as a comparison to those of the solar system. In man's motor engines the force of each explosion performs a small proportion of the work which that amount of stored potential is capable of performing. The larger portion of energy is wasted in the exhaust. Man must learn to regenerate the heat which has not performed work. He must also learn to direct his pulsations of accumulated force in a continuous stream tangentially toward the direction of least resistance if he desires to transmit accumulated energy into speed. Conversely, if he desires to transmit power, he must learn to direct his pulsations of accumulated force less tangentially, and more directly in the direction of greater resistance. The greater the resistance the greater the generation of power and the less its dissipation in speed. The less the resistance the less the generation of power and the greater its dissipation in speed. Universal mechanical principles are perfect. They are perpetual in their source of supply and , they are not wasteful. Every particle of energy is used before its final dissipation. Man's supply of energy is as inexhaustible as the universe from which that supply is drawn. Page 268 Page 269 Man can so perfect his mechanical principles that he can have as continuous a supply of power to perform his work as this planet has to continue its rotation. Perpetual motion for man need be limited only to the wear and tear of the parts of his machines. The driving power for those machines is inexhaustible. All mass rotates from its local west toward its local east, just as all mass revolves from its local west toward its local east. The local west is a surface direction. It is in the direction in which the sun appears to set. The local east is a surface direction. It is in the direction in which the sun appears to rise. The universal west is the expansion of north which is ever away from the sun of any system. It is the centrifugal direction of negative discharge. It is the direction in which all planets are spirally threading their way on their return journey from mass to plane. The universal east is the contraction of south which is ever toward the sun. It is the centripetal direction of positive charge. It is the direction in which all generating light units are spirally threading their way on their outward journey toward the melting pot. Universal power accumulating mechanical principles are as perfect as are universal power distributing principles. Low potential runs the gamut of all the intermediary potentials, with a preponderance of regenerative over degenerative power until it has found the highest potential position in its wave. It then returns by the reverse of the same principles in easy stages of lessening regeneration and preponderant degeneration. Let us recall that north by the way of east is the direction of generation, and south by the way of west is the direction of degeneration. Imagine the degenerative solar emanations following the centrifugal lines of force of the corona until they become regenerated by following the centripetal lines of force which attract them to this planet as positive charge. It cannot be too often repeated that the radio-active force is the degenerative force and is centrifugal. Conversely, the genero-active force is the generative force and is centripetal. In a low potential position, where the ratio of genero-active preponderance is very materially reduced, the balance of radio-active centrifugal force is materially greater in proportion. The pin- wheel-like effect of rotation due to centrifugal preponderance gradually gains control. In such a position force is exerted in tangential directions of gradually lessening resistance from planet to planet, which gradually results in dissipation of power, as expressed in revolution, through speed as expressed in rotation. A study of the accompanying chart on page 272 will make this more clear. On studying the chart, one must bear in mind that the contractive force of attraction is exerted from within, consequently retarding rotation. It is as though the planet were pulling at a rope wound spirally around itself, It must be recalled that the expansive force of repulsion is also exerted from within, consequently accelerating rotation. It is as though the planet were rotating with the aid of a propeller with its shaft turned toward the local west. The direction of rotation of a planet gradually changes in reference to its local direction but never changes its universal direction. Its local direction of morning at birth is not its local direction of evening when it has aged. Page 270 Page 271 In the morning of a planet's life the sun dominates it through its north charging pole. Its local east and west are therefore those with which we are familiar on this planet. And the direction of rotation of the sun is counter-clockwise in reference to an observer located north of the solar system. At the planet's noon of maturity the sun rises and sets in the plane of the planet's equator. Its local east and west are therefore in the plane of the sun's rising and its setting. In the planet's evening the poles reverse their position. Its local east and west are therefore the reverse of those at birth and the direction of rotation is clockwise in reference to an observer similarly located. During its entire period it never rotates or revolves in any other direction than the expanding direction of centrifugal force which ever draws away from north in the direction of north's- expansion, the west which leads to south. The rotation of a planet in space might well be likened to the rotation of a ball when rolled upon the floor. The greater friction of the high potential of the floor causes a greater resistance to the motion of the ball than the lesser friction of the low potential of the air, which impacts against the upper surface of the ball. The planet rolling along the floors of space is resisted in exactly the same manner by the difference in friction between the higher pressures impacting against its inner surface and the lower pressures impacting against its outer surface. The equator of a ball rolling across the floor propelled by a dead center blow, will always be in contact with the floor and the pole of rotation of the ball will always be parallel to the floor. This is because the conditions of resistance remain constant. Resistance pressures which cause the rotation of a planet are not analogous to that of the floor and the ball when propelled under such conditions. The resistance not only is greater against the surface of the planet which is toward the sun but also against that hemisphere of the planet which is toward the ecliptic plane of the sun. Conversely, the resistance is less against the hemisphere which is away from the sun and also that one which is away from the ecliptic plane of the sun. The former state is preponderantly inductive and the latter is preponderantly conductive. The greater the resistance to an action of force the greater the genero-activity. The greater the genero-activity the greater the power of mass to absorb heat. The less the resistance to the reaction of force, the greater the radio-activity. The greater the radio-activity the greater the power of mass to give out its heat. A planet or satellite can only rotate true when its equator is exactly in the plane of the solar or planetary ecliptic. In this position, it is exactly analogous to the rolling of a billiard ball which has been projected without any "english." In this position, its pole of rotation is at an angle of 90° to the plane of the equator of its primary. When in this position, a planet's polar magnetic base has contracted into disappearance so that its electric pole and its pole of rotation coincide. Also the equatorial planes of primary and planet coincide. When in this position, its gravitative center of north is a point of no dimension and its radiative center is in a plane which measures the diameter of the mass. • When in this position, the diameter at the equator is equal to the diameter at the poles. Page 272 Page 273 This position is only possible at the ecliptic of the wave where generation ends and degeneration begins, and for new planets and satellites at the ecliptic focus of a system for their mass, where their youth ends and their age begins. All mass rolls along the floors of space upon that part of its surface where radiation is at a maximum. The blow which gives the impetus to the planet is struck from within exactly in the plane of its ecliptic, the plane of maximum discharge. The resistance to that blow is greatest at the charging poles, the points of maximum charge. As the plane of maximum discharge and the points of maximum charge change constantly during a planet's life period so must the planet therefore constantly change its position in relation to its primary. As the ecliptic area expands and its charging poles draw away from its poles of rotation a planet gradually turns upside down. It then appears to rotate in the opposite direction. Suns give birth to planets and planets to satellites until just before they have perfected their spherical form. Planets are born from sun spots which are located some degrees from the solar equator. After birth they continue to generate during their brief youth. During this period, they draw ever closer to the focussing point for their particular mass in the solar ecliptic area until the equatorial plane of the mass coincides with the solar equatorial plane. For any matured mass the focussing point in the solar ecliptic area is always in the plane of the solar equator, its distance from its center of force depending upon its relative mass. This position marks the end of the young planet's preponderantly generative period and the beginning of its preponderantly radiative period. From this position the new planet gradually recedes as it gradually expands, and tilts its poles as a consequence of its expansion toward its parent and then away from it until it has reversed it natal position. Reference to the charts on pages 221 and 223 will make this statement more clear. One rotation of a planet is one day of a planet. It is the standard unit from which the hours, minutes and seconds are derived. After determination of the relation of a planet to that of the earth as a standard unit, the day of any planet may be determined by a calculation in universal ratios. With the knowledge of the potential position of any planet as indicated by its relative distance, plane and revolution period, its-rotation period can be as easily calculated as its relative mass. Distance, plane and revolution periods are easily determinable. Other dimensions are very often impossible to ascertain. At present, we can determine the periodic day of a planet by observing the return of markings visible on its surface. The days of Mercury, Venus, Uranus and Neptune would be forever beyond our exact knowledge without the ability to calculate potential positions and without the law of universal ratios, for there are no visible dependable markings on these planets. The period of rotation of smaller planets, such as Ceres and Eros would also be hopelessly indeterminable without the aid of this law. The rotation period of either a planet or satellite when near its gravitative-radiative center is so long that such a mass always keeps the same surface toward that center. Page 274 Page 275 Mercury, for example, is so embedded in the dense high potential pressures of such close proximity, not alone to the sun but also to the focus of its ecliptic area in the plane of the solar equator, that it cannot turn faster than the contracted ecliptic area pressure of the sun, in that position, will allow it. Venus has not only journeyed into the much lower pressures of twice the distance from the sun but has also broken well away from its close relation to the very high pressures of the solar equatorial plane. As a consequence, Venus is rotating sufficiently fast to periodically expose her entire surface to the sun. The earth's satellite, and in all probability two to four of Jupiter's, are still so bound to the high pressure zones of their gravitative centers that they are obliged to keep their same faces constantly toward their parents. The reason for the accelerated rotation of the outer planets of a system and the decelerated rotation of the inner ones is very simple. Outer planets are farther south in their systems and inner ones are farther north. Magnetic acceleration of rotation is toward the south and toward increasing oblateness which leads to plane. Electric deceleration of rotation is toward the north and toward decreasing oblateness which leads to mass. In a high potential position the contraction of genero-activity from within is sufficiently great to ; retard the pin-wheel-like impetus developed by its radio-active expulsion from within. In a low potential position, where the ratio of genero-active force is very materially reduced, the balance of radio-active force is materially greater in proportion. The pin-wheel-like effect of rotation due to centrifugal preponderance gradually gains control with a resultant acceleration. It must be recalled that acceleration of any one dimension must be balanced by deceleration of another. What a planet gains or loses in power-time must be balanced by a gain or loss in speed-time. Neptune, the outer planet, her satellite, and some of the outer satellites of Jupiter and Saturn appear to rotate in the opposite direction to that of the other planets. This is termed the "retrograde direction." Planets never cease turning in the same direction. They but change their positions in relation to us as observers. If one looks down on the north pole of a mass which is turning from west to east it will appear to turn counter clock-wise, as though the hands of a clock turned backwards. Conversely, if one looks up on the south pole of a mass which is turning from west to east it will appear to turn clock-wise. We are not permitted to change our positions in space to so observe the various planets, but the various planets have changed their relative potential positions so that we see the poles tilting in sufficiently different angles to produce the same effect as though we had changed our position. We look almost directly at the south pole of Uranus and as a consequence it turns quite clock-wise, its four moons revolving retrogressively and always in view. In this .position they transcribe full circles instead of foreshortened ones. We see Neptune with its north pole tilting upside down. Naturally Neptune will appear to rotate in quite the opposite direction, and her satellite will also s appear to revolve in the opposite direction to that of our planet. Page 276 Page 277 Just so with the outer satellites of Jupiter and Saturn. These two planets have not turned upside down, but the satellites which rotate and revolve in a retrograde direction have broken so far away from the ecliptic control of their primaries that the effect is the same as though they were still close to their primaries and their primaries had turned upside down. The chart on page 227 representing the evolution of the orbits of planets' moons, will clearly illustrate this happening. These outer satellites of Jupiter and Saturn which revolve in retrograde directions to us as observers, will continue to break still farther away from the control of their primaries until they become comets which have two controls instead of one. Let us recall another basic law which reads: "All mass simultaneously expresses both opposite effects of motion, and each opposite effect is cumulatively preponderant in repeative sequences." Consider the effect of this law upon the rotation of a mass. A new born planet is increasingly generative for a time. Being a small mass as compared to the sun, it matures more quickly. During the contractive period it rotates in such a position that its equator is at an angle of nearly 90 degrees to the solar equator. As radiative oscillations accumulate toward the equilibrium- of maturity, the equator dually settles down to a plane of coincidence with the solar equator, the pole of rotation tilts to an upright position and the charging poles creep towards the pole of rotation. As radiative oscillations accumulate to a negative preponderance for the mass, the equator slips below the solar equatorial plane, the poles of rotation tip farther toward a reversal of their natal positions and the charging poles creep down and up the planet's contour toward its equator. Negative preponderance in its sequence turns the planet upside down as its potential position lowers. Its discharging surface becomes very much greater than its charging surface. When this position has been reached, the planet appears to rotate the other way, the opposite from direct, which is termed the retrograde direction. If these statements are true and the rotation of a mass varies in speed and power according to its potential position, then the twelfth as well as the first dimension, should be taken into consideration in the writing of the law of gravitation. If these statements are true, slow rotation must be related to the attraction of gravitation which accumulates mass through the power of genero-active energy expressed inductively as positive charge, and fast rotation to the repulsion of radiation which redistributes mass through the power of radio- active energy expressed conductively as negative discharge. _____________________ Page 278 Page 279 CONTENTS CHAPTER XXII EXPRESSIONS OF GRAVITATION AND RADIATION REVOLUTION-THE THIRTEENTH DIMENSION All mass revolves around a nucleal center which becomes the gravitative-radiative center of that mass. All shapeless, amorphous mass revolving spirally in the electric stream of centripetal force around a vortex becomes rotating spherical mass when sufficiently accumulated. Fast revolution is nature's method. of generating energy into an accumulation in mass, and slow rotation is her method of storing that accumulation. Fast rotation is nature's method of dissipating stored accumulations of energy in mass. When fast revolving mass becomes fad rotating mass the ratios of its separate parts reverse their dimension attributes. Rotation gives its speed to revolution and takes power from revolution in equal exchange. Rotation is an effect which is born of revolution. All revolving mass is either heading toward a vortex, thus increasing both charge and discharge, or away from a vortex, thus decreasing both charge and discharge. The revolution of mass begins in the maximum tenuity of the inertial plane and ends in the maximum rigidity of the point of north at the overtone of the wave. The outward journey begins with a preponderance of positive charge and of increasing speed, and ends at the point of cessation of speed. The return journey begins with a preponderance of negative discharge and maximum speed from the accumulation of mass at the point of north and ends with cessation of speed at the inertial plane. Whether planet or light unit, all mass, discharged from the sun, rises away from the sun until it finds its potential position and then revolves around it in slowly expanding spirals until each discharged mass has expanded into disappearance. This volume is necessarily too brief to enter into all of the complexities of the systems of lower potential, such as those of the lithium, berylium, boron, nitrogen, oxygen and fluorine lines. For purposes of analogy, it would be more simple to confine this brief explanation to the potential position of our own solar system with which we are most familiar. Our solar system occupies a high potential position in its wave, a position corresponding, in all probability, to the position of the element manganese. Our solar system is a mid-tonal pressure wall erected near the apex of the positive cone of the wave, very close to the 4++ position of the carbon line. A later volume will contain a series of drawings which will define the approximate position of the solar system in its wave. By a study of these drawings it will be seen that the zodiacal expansion of the solar ecliptic area indicates with unerring precision the exact relation of this solar system to its point of ultimate north. The sun of this system is speeding through space at an inconceivable speed, ever tilting its pole of rotation toward its ultimate point of north and ever contracting its polar magnetic base as it nears its destination. Page 280 The solar ecliptic is ever tilting and contracting its base toward and into the ecliptic planes of the cubes of motion and contracting its area to a plane which will coincide with the solar equator. As our sun speeds spirally toward the point of north, it carries with it all of the planets which it has discharged. These planets with all of the sun's radiative emanations are swirling about the sun as one of the pressure walls of the cone of the wave of which our solar system is a part. If the cone of the wave were not an ever bending one the planets would all revolve in the same plane and there would be no zodiacal expansion of approximately 16°. When the exact position of this solar system is calculated in reference to its ultimate destination at the overtone of its wave, the orbit of Neptune will be one of its important measuring units. With the orbit of Neptune as a magnetic base and the center of the orbit as the end of a plumb line dropped from an assumed altitude as an apex, the position of the sun in relation to this point will tell us a marvelous story. When this operation is repeated with all of the planets, always being certain that the same assumed altitude is used in each case, the direction of the bending line of our wave can undoubtedly be closely approximated. If revolution of mass began at the south inertial plane and continued its outward journey in unbending cones, the laws of motion which govern orbital variation would be very simple to write and to comprehend.
