---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 8 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 8

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 8 of 15
**Words**: ~7,403
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

It is in a different pressure zone, where releasing pressures expand mass of little volume to mass of big volume. And Saturn, a vast but pithy planet, would either completely ionize or shrink to insignificance if moved to Mercury's orbit, just as Mercury would explode if suddenly moved to Saturn's. Then comes Uranus, softer still, wobbling on its changing pole; then Neptune, so tenuous that a cloud of ours would be a rock in comparison. Beyond Neptune, our last known planet, which is but approximately three-elevenths of the distance to the limits of our solar system, there are more planets which are so vast and so tenuous that Jupiter is a pea beside one and Neptune a solid in comparison. Within our solar system are pressures, temperatures, and densities undreamed of by man, because miscalculated by him from unit pressures of this planet with which he is familiar. Page 159 Even man's instruments have deceived him in his calculations for they but translate states of motion in which units of comparison are but relative, though true in ratio. Man measures the density of the sun by its rigidity as compared with that of our planet. The sun is, therefore, given as one-quarter the density of our planet. It is quite appropriate to state the density of our planet as five times that of water on our planet because the water is part of the planet and subject to the same pressures of our orbital position. Our planet is in a different pressure compartment" from that of any other mass. Not so, however, can he compare the pressures or densities of another planet with ours. Relatively yes, but the low relative pressure and potential which allows rigidity here would vaporize our expanded earth at the surface of the sun. If removed to Mercury's orbit our earth would become white hot, and when it cooled it would be approximately the size of Mercury. On the other hand the vapor which arises from a steam exhaust in a day would furnish ample material for the solid head and streaming tail of a conspicuous comet if it were removed to the low pressure zones of the type of comet whose orbit is in a plane at an angle of 50° to the solar ecliptic, and whose aphelion exceeds twice Neptune's distance from the sun. That large cloud floating high up in the cold of upper atmospheric low pressure would be but a quart or two when compressed into water lower down. The albedo, or light reflecting quality, of a cloud of our planet is not to be taken as a standard unit of albedo measurement for a lower pressure zone far removed. Laws governing the measurements, in ratios of standard units of distant pressures, temperatures and densities, and their translation into standard units familiar to us, will be written down when further consideration of this universe of purely mechanical motion makes it logical to consider its mathematics. It is necessary at this point to describe briefly the basic principles governing pressures. Pressure is that relative state of opposed force necessary to sustain the illusion of relative density of substance in motion. The dimensionless universe of inertia is absolutely stable. The universe of motion is a corpuscular universe of varying but relative density which simulates the appearance of stability through motion. The varying power of mass to appear to attract mass causes an appearance of variation of the pressure dimensions of all masses. Man classifies masses of various densities as gases, liquids and solids. The density or tenuity of any mass is in proportion to its 'preponderance of pressure opposition. Like all other effects of motion, pressure has its opposites. The opposites of pressure are the electric pressure of contraction and the magnetic pressure of expansion. One pulls inward from within. The other pushes outward from within. One attracts mass by drawing it closer together. The other repels mass by separating it. The greater the positive charge, the greater the pressure of contraction. The greater the pressure of contraction, the less the volume. The greater the negative discharge, the greater the pressure of expansion. The greater the pressure of expansion, the less the volume. Page 160 All mass is corpuscular and all mass is relatively solid. All solid mass has first been melted by the friction of the active opposition of the two pressures, and has then been frozen into the state of relative rigidity by the locking of the opposing pressures into inactive potential positions. Great solidity means less axial activity. Great solidity also means preponderance of contraction pressure toward high potential. Great axial activity means less solidity. Great axial activity also means preponderance of expansion pressure toward low potential. Melt a bar of iron and it becomes axially active. It also becomes less solid. Vaporize it by expansion pressure and its axial activity multiplies. Also its volume has increased enormously, for centrifugal activity demands space in which to display its activity. The heavy, solid bar of iron will now no longer drop to the ground but, on the contrary, will rise into the air. What has happened to cause so great a change? Let us first repeat the definition. "Pressure is that relative state of opposed force necessary to sustain the illusion of relative density of substance in motion." Pressures have been reversed. High contraction pressures have become preponderantly expansive. High potential has become low potential. Low axial activity has become great axial activity. Restricted volume has become extended volume. Great density has become low density. That which is called "weight" has entirely disappeared as far as the gravitational effect of this planet is concerned. Its weight, in respect to this planet of high potential, has been reduced to the same relative weight as other mass of lower potential. The expanded mass of iron now falls of its own weight toward low pressures, just as it rises from this planet because of its loss of weight. The bar of iron is no longer heavy in respect to this planet, nor is it hard, compact, rigid or dense. Its particles no longer cohere as a solid of man's concept. It passes through the equilibrium of this planet's sea level pressure of fifteen pounds per square inch, in which state it has no apparent weight, and still continues to expand until its low density forces it to fall toward the low pressures appropriate to low density. Its mass, however, does not change. Only its dimensions change. In lowering its density, by reversing its pressures and potential, its axial activities are increased, its orbital activities decreased, thus reducing its ability to attract. On the contrary, it develops a strong ability to repel. It can no longer hold together as a piece of iron. The voltage and amperage of the little oscillating electro-magnetic opposing pressure pumps of which it is constituted are lowered. By increasing its volume the distance between each corpuscle is increased so that their apparent ability to attract each other decreases. Increased volume also decreases surface tension pressure, a quality which belongs, in relative degree, to all mass. Page 161 Increased volume and decreased surface tension pressure means increased vapor pressure. Decreased surface tension pressure lessens the ability of mass to attract and to cohere. Increased surface tension pressure means greater density or solidity; also it means greater ability to attract. Solidity is an increasingly unstable condition of matter due to increasing electric pressures developed by repeative series of explosive disturbances in inertia. The greater the disturbance, the greater the effort necessary to produce it. The greater the effort, the greater the opposition to the effort by an equal and opposite resisting pressure. The greater the resistance, the greater the heat generated by the contact of the two oppositely flowing streams. The greater the heat, the less the relative solidity for that respective pressure. The greater the incandescence, the greater the radiation of heat by expulsion. The greater the expulsion by radiation, the more solid, dense and rigid the radiating substance. The more rigid a substance is, the more true it is to its own plane of pressure. The more true to plane, the more gyroscopic the motion of its particles. The more gyroscopic the motion of its particles, the more apparently stable the mass. The greater the solidity, the greater the instability, but the greater is the illusion of stability. The outgoing ever-contracting force of the explosive actions meet each other at the north planes of opposition, and rebound toward the south planes of inertia, ever expanding as they rebound. Man lives and thinks in terms of solidity because he is accustomed 'to the environment of his own present, potential. Solidity is something which he can see, feel, weigh and command. It is difficult for man to comprehend that his dependable solids are but contracting or expanding states of motion gyroscopically held in apparent suspense for a sufficient length of time to create the deceptive illusion of permanence. If man would picture the evolution and devolution of entire solar systems as mere flashings of fireflies in the meadow, he would form a better concept of the instability of solidity. The process of one is exactly the same as that of the other. Every effect produced during the ten billion trillion years of the one is exactly repeated in the one second of the other. Solidity is therefore but an effect of genero-active contractive pressure. Like all effects of motion, it is periodic and its tones are in conformity with the formula of the locked potentials. Like all effects of motion, its opposite and equal balancing effect increases its resistance to accumulation as accumulation increases. Greater positive charge opposed to greater negative discharge means greater potential. Greater potential means greater pressure opposition. Greater pressure opposition means higher melting point, less volume and greater density. A metal which will melt at 2,000° at sea level pressure of this planet will still remain a frozen solid at 200,000,000,000° in the opposing high pressures of the sun's dense crust. A radio-active emanation expelled from a low pressure atom may not exceed ten miles per second, while that of a high pressure atom of the tenth octave such as radium, will approach 186,000 miles per second. Page 162 The increasing contractive electric pressures of the octaves of the elements, from 0 = through 1 + 2 + 3 + to 4 + , are accompanied by rising melting points and lowering volumes. + The decreasing, expansive magnetic pressures from 4+ back through 3 — 2 — 1 — to 0 = are + accompanied by lowering melting points and greater volumes. Axial activity increases as radio-active pressures decrease. Orbital activity increases as genero-active pressures increase. The entire universe is one of varying potential. Therefore, it is one of varying opposing pressures. If the entire universe of dimension is one of varying density, which means that it is more or less apparently solid everywhere, then it necessarily follows that the entire universe must be one of varying pressures. If this universe is one of varying pressures, the axiom of Euclid heretofore quoted cannot be true. If that state of motion which is called "solid" is a state in which the tremendous contractive pressure of great accumulation of' the energy constant has become moulded into compact electric mass of high potential, then those states of motion which are called "liquid" and "gaseous" are merely the lower pressures appropriate to the slight accumulation of the energy constant into more tenuous masses. More tenuous masses freeze or melt at lower temperatures where the resistance to integration is not so intense. An active gas like hydrogen, which leaps explosively into flame from the high opposing pressures of the sun's surface at a speed of thousands of miles per minute, ascends quite leisurely in comparison, and without combustion, from this planet's lower pressure. Upon Uranus or Neptune, hydrogen undoubtedly exists in a free state, frozen, as its prototype, caesium, is frozen upon this earth. Upon Neptune, hydrogen undoubtedly falls of its own weight as aluminum would fall on this planet. Nature build tonal walls with which she divides her effects of motion. If a pressure wall is developed, it must necessarily follow that somewhere an opposite wall of resistance is set :up against which that pressure can develop. This principle holds true in the apparent voids of space just as it does on this planet in a compression tank, an automobile tire, the depths of the ocean or thousands of miles within its crust. Every pressure develops an exactly equal and opposite resisting pressure. Pressures resulting from the accumulation of mass of sufficient density to be perceptible to man would be relatively present in mass which is beyond man's perception. Man's "ether of space" is substance in motion just as molten metal is matter in motion. It is, in fact, infinitely more active, even though that activity cannot be perceived by the senses of man. The evidence of it, however, can be plainly seen and accurately measured. The unseen universe is existent not alone through deduction, or as a theory, or as a logical conclusion. Every effect of motion is registered in light and all its pressure walls are visible spectro-scopically, each having its own pressure line. Zeeman long since stumbled upon one evidence of the ten octaves by sending a strong generative charge through sodium, but the significance of what he saw had no meaning for him. By thus increasing its pressure, he saw ten yellow lines, each one of which told the story of an over tone of that particular state of motion, 1+, reproduced in a different octave. All of the ten octaves are measurable in every dimension even to the infra and ultra ends. Page 163 Also are their waves exactly computable and their other dimensions exactly ascertainable. The difference between any one "part" of space and any other is purely relative in all of its dimensions. The dimensions of the one differ from the dimensions of the others, that is all. Some parts consist of energy accumulated into power by the deceleration of axial and acceleration of orbital speed-time, while other parts consist of energy dissipated into the opposite effects of motion. Pressure opposition is but one of the effects of motion. All effects of motion are both gravitative and radiative, but one or the other in preponderance. Mass accumulates in focal centers, because of a preponderance of positive charge. Accumulation of mass is due to the attractive power of gravitation to increase pressures and thus force great volume into less volume with focal centers of greater positive charge and greater contractive pressure. The desire to attract is purely a gravitative effect and the reactive repulsion is a radiative one. One is an accumulating pressure, which resists redistribution. The other is a distributing pressure, which resists accumulation. There are zones of opposing pressures throughout this universe of motion which vary in density as the distance increases from the nuckal centers of centripetal vortices. In every mass, the attraction of the accumulating pressure and the repulsion of the distributing pressure exert their forces in opposite directions. The dimensions of the electric stream increase in inverse universal ratio to the dimensions of the magnetic stream. An expanded mass rising in the air has a lifting capacity in respect to the mass from which it is rising, and it also has weight, or compression capacity in respect to the potential toward which it is falling. In any mass the lifting capacity, in relation to high potential, is equal to the compression capacity in relation to low potential. The lifting capacity of a_ gas rising in the air exactly corresponds to the action of a suction pump. It reduces the potential and pressure of the planet by expanding it. On the contrary, an added weight exactly corresponds to the action of a compression pump in raising the potential and pressure of the planet by contracting it. Consider for example, the radiation of the sun. The radiation has a lifting power in respect to the sun, the effect of which is to degenerate the sun. On the other hand, it has weight in respect to the planets against which it impacts, the effect of which is to regenerate them. The degeneration of any mass is exactly balanced by the regeneration of another mass. All effects of motion are always in equilibrium, and all are tonally periodic. All periodicities are orderly and their orderliness of increase and decrease of intensity in their expression always conforms with the octave formula of the locked potentials, and also with the cyclic order of five inbreathings and five outbreathings which constitute one superinhalation-exhalation period. Page 164 Page 165 Page 166 CONTENTS CHAPTER XI ATTRACTION AND REPULSION "Every particle of matter in the universe is attracted to every other particle of matter in the universe." "Every body attracts every other body with a force that varies directly as the product of their masses and inversely as the square of the distance between them." No more fundamental principles have been written than these two Newtonian laws and no laws have been more universally accepted. Concerning Newton's laws of gravitation, it is stated that they are "the broadest and most fundamental which nature makes known to us." If it can be shown that the substance which we call matter has no power to attract, but that it is motion only which attracts, and if it can also be shown that the apparent ability of substance to attract through motion is equally true of its apparent ability to repel through motion, then the first of these laws is inaccurate and should be rewritten. Let us see whether the above law would not be more in keeping with the laws of motion if it were rewritten thus: Every mass has the relative apparent ability to attract and to repel every other mass, its relative ability depending on its relative potential. Let us now consider the varying power of mass to attract other mass according to the distance one is from the other. If the second law is true, two equal masses of two different substances must attract each other equally from equal distances. If it can be shown that different masses do not attract each other equally, but on the contrary, that there is a great range in the variability of the power of different masses to attract each other, then the law cannot be true. If it can also be shown that the apparent ability of mass to attract and also to repel increases and decreases in orderly ratios as volume, density, pressures, time, temperature, and other dimensions increase and decrease, then dimensions, other than mass and distance, should be considered in the writing of the law. If it can be shown that the apparent power of attraction is applicable to all forming mass which is heading in the outward journey from the plane of concept to the point of north and that the apparent power of repulsion is applicable to all dissolving mass which is returning to the inertial plane of concept, then the second of these laws is inaccurate and should be rewritten. Let us see whether this law would not also be more in keeping with the laws of motion if it were rewritten thus: Every body attracts and repels every other body with a force which increases and decreases in the universal ratios in accordance with its potential position and according to whether the direction of the mass is toward the north or toward the south. This chapter will consider whether the attributes which we call attraction and repulsion belong to substance, and the succeeding chapters will consider what relation dimension has to the apparent ability of mass to attract. It is generally assumed that the substance of matter attracts and that some other force repels. Page 167 What it is that repels is not quite so certain, but the generally accepted theory is that it is light. Light is supposed to be something else than that of which solid cold matter is composed. Light is supposed to repel. It does. But it also attracts just as all substance attracts and also repels. The word "apparently" must be understood to be used as qualifying the above and all similar statements and the word "mass," when used, is assumed to mean an aggregate of states of motion of the substance but not the substance itself. The tail of the comet which 'ever points away from the sun is supposedly one of the proofs of the theory that light repels. If the head of the comet is its most solid part and its tail proportionately less solid as its distance from its head increases, and if the pressure is greater the nearer the sun, just as the pressure in water is greater the farther down, would not the tail of the comet seek the lower pressures and the head the higher, just as a cork tied to a nail with a string would float above the nail. Is not the opposition of pressures and the desire of potential to seek its own pressure zone just as acceptable an explanation as the theory of light repulsion? Is this explanation not also more logical, for is not the sun the great center of attraction of this system? If so, is it quite logical to say that the sun attracts and the sun's light repels? There is however, a half truth here, for light is accumulated energy which heats to incandescence as it accumulates, radiates as it heats and expands as it radiates. Expansion is a state of corpuscular separation upon which the repulsion principle is based. The expansion pressure of radiation is a state of motion which pushes, just as the contraction pressure of generation is a state of motion which pulls. The other half of this truth is that light and mass are the same. Mass is also accumulated energy which cools as it radiates and which contracts as it cools. Contraction is a state of corpuscular integration upon which the attraction principle is based. Here are two half truths which trace the source of both opposites to the same focal center. Let us consider these two half truths and see if they cannot be made into one whole truth. First let us consider whether light or mass either repels or attracts as a substance or as an aggregate of substances, or whether it is motion alone which performs these miracles of whirling suns and planets about in space to suit its whims. If light repels, something else must attract, for it would not be possible for light to do both. Yet the physicist bases the phenomenon of growing plant life upon the ability of light to attract. That process which he terms "photo-synthesis" is one in which the light of the sun is presumed to attract and to assemble substances into form. Every physicist knows to a certainty that light directed against a metallic plate will increase its positive charge. More than that, various intensities and colors of light will vary the positive charge. Further still, various metals will vary vastly in their ability to absorb additional positive charge from the same sources of light. Further still, metal plates so over-charged by the light will gradually lose that charge in the dark. Consider light in the aspect of a flame. The flame from a birch log rises rapidly in a direction radially away from the earth's center in exactly the opposite direction from that in which a log of birch would fall. Page 168 The birch log is the accumulated potential of contractive pressure and is consequently subject to gravitational pull which is preponderant to the expansive pressure of radiational push. The flame from the birch log is a series of explosions which release the accumulation of contractive pressure. The flame is a suddenly expanded radio-active release of energy which so explosively and so eagerly seeks the lower potential of pressures far removed, that the friction caused by resistance to so great a speed develops heat enough to produce incandescence. The birch log and the flame from it are the same substance. The substance has but reversed its pressure preponderance. Here is a substance which appears to attract when its power-time is in preponderance and its volume contracted, and to repel when its speed-time is in preponderance and its volume expanded. If substance attracts, something else must repel. It is unreasonable and illogical to say that substance can both attract and repel. What is there in this universe other than substance? There is the motion of substance. Does substance attract and motion repel? Let us consider this. We are familiar with the fact that warm air rises and cold air sinks. Here is the same substance proceeding in opposite directions, certainly not because of a difference in substance. We are familiar with the rain falling to the ground and the vapor rising to the clouds. Here again is the same substance proceeding in opposite directions. We are familiar with the expulsion of water by oil, of naphtha by water, of ether by naphtha, of hydrogen by air, and innumerable other substances which repel other substances for some good reason. We are also familiar with the fact that the ability of different substances to expel or repel each other is a relative one. We are familiar with the attraction of chlorine for sodium, of nickel for iron, of fluorine for hydrogen, of boron for nitrogen, bromine for potassium and innumerable other substances which attract other substances for some good reason. We are also familiar with the fact that the ability of different substances to attract each other is a relative one. We are also familiar with methods whereby opposing substances can be induced to attract each other by forcing a union under high pressure, or by using a catalyst as a mediator. Likewise, we are familiar with methods which will separate bonds between united substances. Can it be possible then, that substance has any relation to those qualities which we call attraction or repulsion? If, by changing the volume of a mass, it rises instead of obeying the pull of gravitation, is it not reasonable and logical to assume that volume has some power to modify gravitational pull. If, by changing the temperature of two equal masses of the same substance, they separate, and if by equalizing them, they come together, is it not reasonable and logical to assume that temperature has some relation to the phenomena of attraction and repulsion? If, by changing the temperature of two equal masses of the same substance, it changes their volumes, densities, pressures and all other dimensions, is it not logical to assume that dimension is in some manner related to the phenomena of attraction and repulsion? One needs no more convincing proof of the relative ability of mass to attract and to repel than this well known characteristic of all elemental substances to find each other. Page 169 When substances find each other, they also find their opposites which revolve in exactly the same plane. Every state of motion is seeking a similar state of motion. Every state of motion has not only its own pressure zone, but its own plane. All of the elements of matter revolve in their own separate planes. The atoms of each element will eventually come together when released from locked positions in higher potentials. Every mass revolving in one plane resists the proximity of mass revolving'in any other plane. Any compound mass of varying plane will eventually separate into its constituents, each of which will find its true position in its own plane and pressure zone. Every chemist is thoroughly aware of the relative ability of one mass to attract another, irrespective of distance. Every chemist knows that units of elements, called ions, break away from certain compounds with varying degrees of violence. The chemist calls this phenomenon ionization, and thinks of it as a chemical effect, a reaction. Ions are masses. The law for one microscopic ion is the same as for a planet. If the chemist would think of all actions as gravitational, and all reactions as radiational effects, he would know that ionization is due to the repellent, separative power of magnetic radio-active force to expel these little planetary ions in order that magnetism may carry out its desire to diffuse electrically accumulated masses. The supposition that atomic motion is an electrical effect and that the atoms of the elements are thereby exempted from obeying the laws of gravitation, misleads the chemist. He is also misled by the supposition that all matter is composed of exactly similar negative electrons and positive protons in different quantities arranged differently in each kind of atom. The chemist assumes that there is one more electron in mercury than in gold. This new theory is now leading him to the expenditure of useless effort in trying to "knock" one electron out of mercury to produce gold. One might as well try to "knock" a planet out of our solar system. The fact is the reverse of the chemist's assumption. If one electron could be "knocked out," and if that act would change mercury, the change would not be to gold. It would be to thallium or to lead. Likewise one electron removed from lead would not produce mercury as hoped. It would result in bismuth. If one of our planets could be "knocked out" of our solar system, the event would increase our zodiacal expansion by at least two degrees, and retard our solar evolution by at least eighty-five million years. The loss of one electron from the element mercury would be equivalent to a substantial discharge toward negative weakness. This discharge would cause the plane of mercury to increase its angle to the plane of lutecium, which would be the opposite effect necessary for the production of gold. The only way to change mercury to gold is to increase the contraction pressure of the mercurial atom and thus change its plane to one slightly nearer that of the lutecium atom. The chemist recognizes the variable power of substance to attract and repel in that effect which he has termed "valency." Valency is purely an expression of gravitational variation, as ionization is an expression of radiational variation. Page 170 The chemist knows that hydrogen and fluorine atoms, if released in a large room will eagerly find each other. He knows also that hydrogen and carbon atoms released within an inch of one another will not find each other. On the contrary, they revolve in planes of such wide angles and their relative positive charges are proportionately so unequal, that they have to be forced together under the very high pressure of the arc lamp to make them combine. Every chemist knows the variability of pressure in every element at every temperature. Every physicist knows that condensation alters the direction of any vapor. The physicist tests the law of gravitation by producing a state of vacuum which is non existent in nature. In a vacuum, he finds that a feather and a piece of lead are attracted toward the center of the earth with the same velocity. This is a universe of varying pressures and the production of an abnormal condition in a tube is not a test of the relative power of substance to attract or to repel substance. If a tube large enough to enclose this planet and long enough to reach the sun's surface could be pumped free of its opposing pressures, the earth would fall to the sun instead of floating in the orbit mapped out for it by the two opposing pressures which determine its position. Every physicist knows that the specific gravity of every element, compound or mixture differs from that of any other. That quality in substance which we call "weight" is merely an indication of the apparent relative ability of substance to attract substance in proportion to its relative density and potential. Every metallurgist knows that some alloys can be produced very simply because of the willingness of some metals to unite and the great unwillingness of others. The metallurgist is accustomed to the use of high pressure in forcing his metals to unite, and the chemist to the use of very low pressures in causing his gases to unite. Modern science recognizes the varying power of substance to attract and to repel in that effect termed electro-motive force, but its basic cause is presumed to be electrical. Electricity and gravitation are not yet recognized as identical expressions of the same force. Modern science is perfectly familiar with the oscillatory motion of electro magnetic force, and also with the fact that opposed oscillations are opposed forces. All of the effects of motion are recorded as dimensions. Every dimension has its opposites, and every change in preponderance from one opposite to the other simultaneously changes every other one of the eighteen series of opposites to balance that change. The force of attraction, which is electric, and the force of repulsion, which is magnetic, are both opposite pressure dimensions, and they must change their relations as other dimensions change. Neither the force of attraction, nor the force of repulsion is in any way an attribute of the One universal substance. Substance has no power to attract, to repel, to unite or to separate. These qualities belong to motion and not to substance. If either of these qualities were attributes of substance, the unchanging One substance would then be changeable. All mass is accumulated electro-magnetic potential seeking the pressure zone of its potential. Page 171 All mass is either charging, in which case it is flowing in an electric stream of centripetal preponderance, or it is discharging, in which case it is flowing in a magnetic stream of centrifugal preponderance. Mass flowing in a stream is conditioned by the current of the stream. An electric stream always flows spirally toward the gravitative center of the mass, or system, or wave of systems, toward the apex of each of their cones of energy. Magnetic streams always flow spirally toward the inertial planes of the mass, or system, or wave of systems, toward the bases of their cones of energy. These two streams pass each other going in opposite directions in the same cones of energy and all mass carried by the streams is conditioned by their motion. Attraction and repulsion are merely apparent effects of electric action and magnetic reaction. Attraction and repulsion are the apparent effects of the opposites of motion. One is an effect of revolution, the other of rotation. One is an effect of gravitation, the other of radiation. One is an effect of contraction, the other of expansion. One is an effect of inhalation, the other of exhalation. One is an assembling or associating force, an assimilative force of gravity, or growth, which causes mass to draw together, to integrate, to accumulate. The other is a disassembling or dissociating force, and eliminative force of emission, which causes mass to emanate, to separate, to disintegrate. One is the force of displacement Which generates high pressures as accumulated potential; the other is the force of replacement which releases high pressures and accumulated potential into low pressures and low potential. In any mass its constant of centripetal force is its constant of power to attract. In any mass its constant of centrifugal force is its constant of power to repel. Let us consider these opposite effects of motion separately. First let us consider the contractive pressure of electricity and its effect, which is that of attraction. Electricity attempts to displace substance by taking it from its expanded position in inertia, setting it in motion and gathering it together in solid masses. Charging light units draw closer to each other. They appear to attract one another. They gravitate toward each other. They revolve around each other and rotate upon themselves. As they draw closer together they charge each other, thus mutually assisting each other in remaining in their unstable position of displacement. Each part of every charging light unit or system appears to attract each other part irrespective of its potential. Contraction of volume is the inevitable effect. Accumulating mass absorbs heat. Higher electric pressure increases heat. Heat absorbing light units are raising their potentials through vitalizing inhalation. They accumulate potential by nature's process of raising low potentials to the low melting points characteristic of low pressures and low potentials and then freezing them into form at the low freezing points characteristic of low pressures and low potentials; and then repeating this process in the higher potentials of each succeeding octave of inhalation. Light units which are increasing their potentials are endothermic, contracting, generating light units. Generating light units or systems are centripetal. Page 172 Their force is in the direction of nucleal centers of closing spirals. Centripetal, closing spirals pack accumulating mass more closely together into vortices which are ever whirling toward the apices of ever shortening cones. The whirling vortices of closing spirals of opposing cones become nucleal centers of maximum integration and maximum resistance to integration. They are the gravitative centers of forming systems. They are the focusing points toward which all charging light units of increasing potential, and integrating mass "fall," and become absorbed as heat units of potential energy; and away from which all discharging light units of -lowering potential and disintegrating mass "rise" and are radiated as heat emanations. Centripetal, closing spirals of opposing cones accumulate positive charge and its accompanying heat resistance into restricted areas at their melding apices which form centers of gravitative force. The apices of spiral cones are the focusing points of the high potential of their systems. All light units of increasing potential decrease in volume as they approach these focusing points. Decrease in volume means increase in density. Increase in density is resisted by magnetic reaction and evidenced in heat. Heat radiates. Radiation expands and expansion cools the surface of the accumulated mass. Cold generates. Generation contracts. Contraction condenses. By this process, a contracting shell of high pressure is formed around any heated mass to prevent expansion, and the hot center ever increases in density as it cools. This is nature's method of changing dimensions of motion in order to produce apparently different substances with which to build the forms thought out by Mind. No better illustration of nature's processes could be found than a comparison with man's processes of transforming iron into the appearance of other substances by exactly the same methods. Iron, superheated and plunged into icy water, will appear quite another substance than the iron of which it is composed. The same iron, or an iron alloy, when cooled in molten lead will have other qualities not there when assembled by the metallurgist. The pressures employed by man in his processes of transformation give to the substances used by man many and varied appearances and forms. Just so with the pressures employed by nature in her processes of transformation by growth. Everything constructed by nature "grows." Growth is an accumulation and assimilation of electric potential caused by endothermic, inhalative genero-activity, followed by eliminative redistribution as the result of exhalative radioactivity. Nothing in nature evades the law of growth nor knows another process. Nature assembles all her forms, and transforms her assembled forms, by raising their opposing pressures to high potentials from low potentials. Nature heats everything which she wishes to transform through growth in high pressure crucibles, and moulds them by high pressure into the desired forms. Nature then subjects them to sudden or gradual cooling by sudden or gradual release of pressure exactly as man cools his heated metals after moulding them into the forms desired by him. Nature freezes her growing things at their characteristic low melting points with every exhalation and melts more for accumulation with each sequential inhalation. Page 173 Nature, the great engineer, builds a supporting framework of bone, or of wood, or fibre, for all her growing things, out of low octaves of high potentials, upon which she superimposes her flesh assembled from high octaves of low potentials. The frameworks of nature's structures require the locked potential positions of higher opposing pressures and higher melting points than is required by the flesh superimposed thereon. This is as true of the growing vegetable as of this growing solar system. The low temperature of our atmosphere supplies a sufficient furnace to bring the low potentials of the flesh of growing vegetables to their melting points. The low pressure of expansion then freezes them into the densities appropriate to their low pressures. The high opposing pressures and temperatures of the sun do exactly the same thing. Planets are melted in its furnace and moulded into shape by the opposing pressure walls which trim and prune them into harmonic spheres of dimensions proportionate to their potential positions. High pressures produce more dense substances of greater strength for the framework of nature's structures whether those structures are vegetables, animals or solar systems. Increase in density means decrease in axial of speed-time dimension and increase in orbital of power-time. Expanded substances are described by chemists as "active" and contracted substances as "inactive." Gases, for example, are classed as active, and solids as inactive states of substances. That is because expanded substances unite more readily in low potential positions where expansion pressure has separated light units to great distances. They are so expanded that they integrate readily. Their opposing streams join. Hard substances on the contrary, do not unite so readily in the low pressures of this planet. They require the force of such high opposing pressures as those of our sun to make them unite. Two gases such as fluorine (501 —) and lithium (501+) will leap together with explosive violence in ordinary atmospheric pressure. Pour several liquids in the same stream and soon they will all blend if the planes of their atoms are not too far removed. A stream of metal balls would require the pressure force of a very high temperature to expand their particles so that they would blend as one liquid metal stream. The constant of activity would not in any way be changed by thus changing its dimensions. The metal would not become more active by expanding it. The expansion would but retard one time dimension and accelerate the other. It was not less active while it was contracted. What it lacked in activity of rotation is made up for in activity of revolution. Activity never lessens and inactivity never increases because of any change of dimension. Every expression of motion has its equal and opposite expression. There can be no increase or decrease in any effect of motion without a balancing increase or decrease in its opposite effect. Apparent decrease in activity of a dense mass is merely a lessening of the speed of rotation and a balancing increase of the speed of revolution. There are two speeds, two opposing speeds, which are equal and opposite. To apply the brake to one is to accelerate the other and vice versa. Just so with volume. Page 174 Expanded volume has less apparent ability to attract. Therefore, there must be relatively less positive charge in expanded than in contracted volume. The volume of a hydrogen or lithium atom is greater than that of a berylium atom, and the volume of berylium is greater than that of boron. The boron atom has greater power to attract and greater power to repel than the berylium atom. The power to attract lessens as volume increases. The power to repel also lessens as volume increases. This is true in every one of the octaves of the elements, in every element, in every atom of every element and in every planet and light unit of every atom. Each element has a different volume and mass and each one, in accordance with its potential position, has a separate and individual ratio of attraction and repulsion power. In any mass the decrease in volume is in exact proportion to the increase in its potential. In any mass the decrease in volume is in exact proportion to the increase in positive charge, contraction pressure and temperature. Mass of less volume is of relatively higher potential, greater positive charge and greater pressure than a similar mass of greater volume.
