---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 6 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 6

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 6 of 15
**Words**: ~7,387
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

This .he can do at any time by regenerating it. The idea of the rose differs from the newborn idea of man's thinking in that the rose is a very much evolved old idea, the memory of which in its millions of generations of evolving through motion-in- opposition is stored in the seed of the rose in motion-in-inertia ready for re-generation or re-incarnation at any time. All evolution of idea of Mind into form is electric and is limited to electro-positive motion-in- opposition. Evolution of idea ceases in the master-tones of motion-in-inertia with the disappearance of evolving form, and begins again its evolution of idea from these same master-tones with the re-appearance of evolving form in motion-in-opposition. The master-tones are a record of all motion and a storehouse of the memory of it. From the master- tones the evolution of form of idea starts, and in them, at the next octave's end, the record of the evolution of that idea is again registered in memory of form. Evolution is but the inevitable effect of periodicity which is characteristic of all phenomena of this creating universe. All growth and declination, also all evolution of a million generations of growth and declination of form, are but stages in the periodicities resulting from the electro-magnetic, oscillating process of thinking.. Page 107 The universal Mind substance of matter, or light, could not be anything but a thinking substance because of its possession of electricity and magnetism as attributes of energy. Electricity and magnetism are those apparently opposite principles or qualities of Mind which cause it to be a thinking substance. The apparent points or centers of disturbance throughout the entirety of the substance of Divine Mind, due to the process of thinking, are electromagnetically registered in light, which is energy, which is matter: all One and the same. Evolving and devolving forms of matter are but changes of various dimensions. The law of the growing rose is the same for man, or giant sun', or stellar galaxy. Page 108 CONTENTS CHAPTER III NEW CONCEPTS OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM The concept of modern science regarding the mutual attraction of oppositely charged particles and the mutual repulsion of similarly charged ones is fundamentally wrong. This concept claims that positive charge repels positive charge and attracts negative "charge," whereas, instead, positive charge attracts positive charge and expels negative discharge. Electricity is the attractive force of this universe of integrating matter. The belief that positive charge repels positive charge is inconsistent with the accepted fact that density increases as pressure and positive charge increase. Greater density and greater pressure are both due to the power of electricity to attract electricity. If positive charge, density and pressure increase in the direction of the gravitative center where the attribute of attraction is at its maximum in a mass or system, and decreases in the opposite direction, which is the direction of negative discharge, it is inconsistent and illogical to claim that positive charge repels positive charge. Cohesion increases as centripetal force predominates, and positive charge increases with increasing ability of mass to cohere. On the contrary, cohesion decreases as centrifugal force predominates, and negative discharge increases with the decreasing ability of mass to cohere. There is no greater evidence of the truth of this than the known fact that any mass accelerates its speed as it approaches a mass of greater positive charge, and decelerates its speed as it recedes from such a mass. Consider, for example, the acceleration of any planet or comet in that part of its eccentric orbit in which it approaches, and its deceleration as it recedes from the sun. Consider the acceleration of the ball as it drops toward the gravitational center of the earth, or the deceleration of the bullet as it is forced away from the earth. Consider the deceleration of the atom of gas which rises of its own accord to seek its own more negative region of low pressure. Careful consideration of these many effects of motion should convince the logical thinker that accumulation of mass is due entirely to the power of electro-positive centripetal force to attract electro- positive centripetal force. On the other hand, the disintegration of mass is due entirely to the expanding power of electro- negative centrifugal force. As the direction of electro-positive lines of force is toward the apex of a cone in a closing spiral, and the direction of electro-negative lines of force are away from the apex in an opening spiral, these opposing forces cannot possibly attract each other. Modern science claims that negative "charge" repels negative "charge" and attracts positive charge, whereas, actually, negative "charge" repels both negative and positive charge. Magnetism is the repellant, or separative force of this universe of disintegrating matter. Man's fixed concept of magnetism as an attractive force is also fundamentally wrong. This basic error is fast tied to every meaning of the very words "magnet" or "magnetic" or "magnetism." These words are universally used in the sense of attraction. Page 109 Every schoolboy has been the proud owner of that little horseshoe shaped toy which picked up bits of iron for his amusement. This remarkable phenomenon quite naturally built up the concept of magnetism as an attractive force. Magnetism supposedly performs these miracles. So it seems. The evidence of one's senses are again deceived by illusion. The exact opposite is the fact. The electro-positive charge is merely increased and the attraction of positive electricity to positive electricity of a similar dimension is demonstrated. This phenomenon of the power of the electropositive charge of the magnet to attract will be exactly described later when the laws of unit, or opposing pressures are written down. Suffice it here to say that a magnet is a piece of iron around which so strong a generative current has been caused to circulate that the billions of little pumps which make up its atoms have been vastly stimulated to excessive zeal in performing their work. The pulsations are so greatly energized that the magnetic outflow is like a swift running stream in comparison with its normal flow. Thus has the positive charge been greatly increased. The axial poles of rotation and the magnetic poles have become almost superimposed, the potential and unit pressures have been raised to such an extent that another piece of iron of normal potential and pressure will be drawn into the higher pressure of the "magnetic". iron, and its potential also raised. This will also be very simple to comprehend when the simple principles of gravitation and an exact understanding of the forces of attraction and repulsion are known. The misconcepts of modern science concerning the fundamental principles of attraction and repulsion are many and all are based upon the wrong belief that electricity is the repellant and magnetism the attractive force. Man speaks of light repulsion and cites the tail of the comet which forever points away from the sun as conclusive proof. This phenomenon is due to the fact that all mass rotates and revolves toward its proper pressure zone. All mass is potential out of place, and all mass constantly seeks the proper pressure zone for its constantly changing potential. All states of motion, including the tail of the comet, conform to this law. The age-long misconcept regarding the supposed attractive power of magnetism must be reversed and its exact opposite substituted in its place. Much practical demonstration has contributed to the building up of the strongest foundations for the present theories. Scientists have built up wrong theories based upon appearances which deceive because they are misunderstood. Man seems to forget that this is a universe of appearances, a universe of illusions, and appearances easily deceive unless one makes allowance for them in every effect of motion. Man is not easily deceived regarding those illusions which he thoroughly understands, such as relative dimensions in perspective, or the illusion of the moon racing behind the trees keeping pace with speeding man, but he is easily deceived regarding those illusions which he does not suspect to be illusions. In order that one may know truth from the illusionary appearance of truth the reader must remember that all objective effects of motion in form are illusions, and also that the relation between those apparent objective forms, and their motion as well, are illusions. Page 110 All illusions will deceive if judged only by the evidence of one's senses. Not for one second does any effect of motion remain unchanged, therefore it is not logical that changing things can be dependable realities. There can be no unconditioned facts in a universe of motion. There can only be ever-changing appearances of facts. All states of motion are relative and deceiving. Comprehension of this universe of Mind is not possible as long as it is considered as a universe of dimension. Nor is it possible if its illusions are considered as realities. Complexity is a drag anchor to comprehension. Comprehension of the universe is very simple when it is considered as a dimensionless universe abounding in appearances which do not deceive because one knows them to be but illusions. All matter is an effect of a basically simple and easily comprehensible cause, the thinking of Mind. Man's reliance upon the reality of the illusions of electrical effect have deceived him into a misinterpretation of his observations. Just as man used to believe firmly the evidences which his senses seemed to prove, that the sun and stars revolved daily, so does he at present firmly believe the evidences which his senses seem to prove, that positive corpuscles repel positive and negative corpuscles repel negative, while each opposite attracts the other. The term "negative charge" is not in accord with the laws of motion. The positive electric force charges and the negative magnetic force discharges. Modern science firmly believes that there are two kinds of corpuscles, negative corpuscles, which are called' electrons, and positive corpuscles, which are called protons. This is a wrong concept. All corpuscles are doubly "charged." And so are all systems and so is all mass doubly "charged." All familiar effects of motion substantiate this statement. It would be absurd to say that this solar system is a positive proton surrounded by negative electrons, which are the planets. All phenomena of motion are repeative. Mass is purely relative. An atom of manganese or iron is exactly like this solar system, in which the positive nucleus is concentrated; and an atom of sodium is exactly like the nebula forming in the constellation of Orion, in which the positive charge is extended and has not formed a distinct nucleus. A biologist would not think of the male as wholly male, for he knows that the male, though preponderantly male, is also female. Each sex is both electric and magnetic. They are therefore electro-magnetic in periodicity, or in other words, male-female in periodicity. Here is the law in accord with truth. Positive charge attracts positive charge and expels negative discharge. Negative discharge repels both negative discharge and positive charge. The fact that electricity expels magnetism does not mean that it repels it. Expulsion is not repulsion. Expulsion is the result of electric attraction which causes electrically charged particles to draw closer together. This effect of closer assemblage, is a centripetal effect of contraction which squeezes magnetism away from the spaces between the integrating particles of electric preponderance. Page 111 The magnetic flow resulting from this squeezing process is merely the reaction of the action of squeezing. The action of electricity might be likened unto the compression of a spring from within. The reaction of magnetism might be likened unto the elastic resistance to that compression by an exactly opposite pressure of expansion from within. Opposite charges do not attract each other. They are opposites and as opposites their very natures are characteristic of all apparent opposites in the assertion of their opposition. A positive light unit, or system, does indeed attract a negative one, not because of its negative, but because of its positive attribute. One single light unit is no different than a mass such as this planet in respect to its double charge. It would be absurd to say that this planet, which is but one light unit of this solar system, and corresponds exactly to one light unit of an atomic system, is either a negative or a positive unit. It is both negative and positive and its positive charge is always preponderant in that part which is nearest to its positive nucleus, which is the sun. Also is its negative discharge always dominant in the portion farthest removed from the sun. TWO APPARENTLY OPPOSITE FORCES It must be remembered that electricity is the attractive force and that magnetism is the repellant force. The attractive force attracts only attractive force, which is itself. Electricity attracts electricity. Electricity does not attract the repellant force, neither does electricity repel the repellant force. On the other hand, magnetism, which is the repellant force, does nothing but perform its function of repelling. It does not attract itself. A repellant force cannot be an attractive force, nor can the attractive force be a repellant force. Each can but fill its own office; one attracts, and thus gathers' light units together into an appearance of solids of matter. The other repels, and thus prys light units apart into the dissolution of solids of matter, into gases and vapors. Magnetism is that force within the universal Mind substance which tends to preserve the One-ness of universal uniformity. Magnetism desires a formless and dimensionless universe, just as electricity desires a universe of form and dimension. Magnetism prevents the apparent separation, or division, of divine Mind into parts as electricity attempts this apparent separation. All the force of electricity is exerted in the attempt to create the illusions of form and dimension. All the force of magnetism is exerted in the attempt to destroy all illusion, all form and all dimension. Neither force completely fulfils its desire, for each partially thwarts the other. The energy of magnetism is the elastic energy of expansion, a straining energy ever pushing toward the inertial line of equalized pressures which lies between any two masses, while the energy of electricity is ever pulling toward the pulsing heart, the gravitational nucleus of every mass. Page 112 ELASTICITY One of the outstanding characteristics of motion is elasticity which also appears to be an attribute of the One substance. Elasticity is due to opposition. Elasticity is that force developed in the One substance of Mind as a reaction to the action of electricity. It is this quality of elasticity which gives magnetism its rebounding force. This elastic, magnetic reaction which is forever and eternally pressing against electric action, is that force which surely restores all opposed motion to inertial equilibrium. Imagine electricity as a compressed spring, with magnetism eternally ready to take advantage of any let-up in the contractive force which is holding it in compression, no matter how slight a relaxation that may be. If one could imagine such a thing as an absolutely complete and sudden withdrawal of all electric contractive energy, the instantaneous response from this elastic counter pressure would cause a cosmic explosion which would instantly destroy all appearance of form. The universe would then be one of equalized pressures, and opposed motion would be at an end. This sudden expansion is exactly what occurs when man combines two or more elements which desire to get away from each other because they are tonally too far removed from each other to be possible mates. The elasticity of magnetism takes advantage of the sudden letup in the process of generation and rebounds so swiftly that it instantly tears apart form which otherwise might take a million years to disintegrate. It is this force of elasticity in magnetism that is constant in its resistance to any appearance of integration into any form whatsoever. ELECTRO - MAGNETIC OPPOSITION Magnetism is radiative and repellant, as electricity is gravitative and attractive. Magnetism repels, electricity attracts. That which 'electricity integrates through gravitation, 'magnetism disintegrates through radiation. Magnetism is the brake upon the wheels of electricity resisting its generation of higher potential and registering that resistance in heat. Electricity is the accelerator which speeds magnetic radiation, the expansion of which is registered in cold. Electricity and magnetism are actually opposing forces which leap away from each other in exactly opposite directions. Forces which depart one from the other do not attract each other. Opposing forces oppose each other. To say that positive charge and negative discharge attract each other is to say that electricity and magnetism attract each other. This would be equivalent to saying that centripetal force attracts centrifugal force, or that generation attracts degeneration, or that a charging body attracts a discharging one. One might as appropriately say that life attracts death. Electricity and magnetism are opposites, and opposites move in opposite directions. Page 113 One is accustomed to thinking that male, which is preponderantly positive, attracts female which is preponderantly negative. It is not the negative "charge" of the female which is attracted to the positive charge of the male, but rather the positive charge of each attracts the other. In youth, when the attraction of opposite sexes is at its maximum, the positive charge of each sex is at its maximum. In age the negative discharge increases, the disintegrating magnetic force dominates, the positive charge decreases, and as a result the attraction of each sex for its opposite decreases until it disappears and repulsion takes its place. The apparent attraction of each action to its reaction is due to the desire of the active force within each for accumulation, and the consequent continuance of the evolving idea of itself through that accumulation. When action is preponderant as positive charge, form of idea evolves. When reaction is dominant as negative discharge, form devolves. The record of the idea of both action and reaction is registered in inertia. The chemist, when breaking up compounds, is accustomed to seeing a negative element seek the positive pole, and a positive element seek the negative pole. He would know better how to interpret this if he would think of his elements in terms of sex, and also consider the process of regeneration of negative discharge by impact against the inertial plane between a discharging and a charging mass. When the positive charges of negative reactions are attracted to positive poles, centrifugally dominant force is conquered by centripetally dominant force. The negative reaction then becomes a positive action. The equalization causes reproduction. The union of an action with its reaction is always followed by the reproduction of separate actions and reactions. These reproduced actions and reactions are rebounds of the union. Magnetism opposes electricity in its desire to transform this universe into one solid, motionless, non- elastic ball of positive electricity. Electricity opposes magnetism in its desire to transform the universe into one of equalized pressures where opposites disappear into dimensionless non-opposition. Positive electricity is preponderantly electric. Positive charge attracts positive charge. Negative electricity is dominantly magnetic. Negative discharge repels both negative and positive charge, for both are electric and magnetism repels electricity. Again must it be written down that electricity and magnetism are not opposites, nor are they two forces. There are no opposites of anything in this universe of the One Thing. Mind is the One substance. Thinking Mind is the One force. If Mind were not a thinking substance the universe would be without force. It would be without life. It would indeed be a dead universe. Thinking is a positive action. To every action there is an equal reaction which is the opposite, or negative matrix, of that action. Page 114 The minus charge of the reactive negative matrix is equal to the plus charge of the active positive form Of idea. The positive form of an idea is stored in inertia as a negative matrix of that form. There is but One active force of thinking Mind and that is the father force. Man calls it electricity. Electricity appears as the first action of the process of thinking and disappears, like temperature, in motion-in-inertia. Electricity therefore has no existence. It belongs to motion, and not to substance. It is desire which causes the One substance to appear to change in state as it performs its function of recording form of idea. Opposites are born of attempted division of unity or One-ness. The very first action which attempts division of unity develops the reactionary apparent opposite reaction which opposes that attempted division. The father force, acting upon the desire of Mind to create, finds that as Mind is the only substance, idea and its form must be developed out of that One substance of Mind. The father force which is the image making faculty of Mind, proceeds to create idea and then to fashion the form of that idea out of the One substance. The opposing magnetic force is then born to prevent the fashioning of the substance of Mind into form. For a time it vainly opposes such formation, but eventually it succeeds. Electricity and magnetism are the two major dimensions of the universal constant of Mind. Therefore the beginning of creation is the beginning of an attempted separation of the One substance by the One force of the substance. The very attempt to divide the One substance gives the appearance of, but does not make, two substances. It only develops two equal and opposing states of motion which man calls "forces." It but creates two illusions. Part of the energy used in the attempted division into two is given to each, and the sum total of this energy is the exact amount of the energy of the One. Electricity and magnetism are attributes of motion only and as separate entities they are but illusions of the substance of matter. Form, or solidity of matter, is an electromagnetic record of states of motion. Therefore solidity of matter is but an illusion which is measurable by electro magnetic dimensions which, in themselves, are but illusions. Out of the father force then, is born the mother force, which man calls magnetism. The symbolism of the creation of Eve out of Adam is basically sound. The father force creates all idea and gives it the appearance of form; but that idea cannot be perpetually held as idea in the appearance of form, nor can it be reproduced without the union of the father with the mother force from which the father force has parted and with which it makes an equilibrium of unity. Both idea and the form of idea return to motion-in-inertia as memory and remain there for a time as formless idea. A union of the father force with the mother force brings it back again into the form of idea, for the united energies of these apparent opposites make the total required by the One. Just so with positive electricity and negative electricity. They are not two forces. Page 115 They are but two aspects of One force attempting to separate, each by its own opposite method, thus becoming two forces. They never succeed in so doing. Each is charged with the other, permeated more or less, in accord with its periodicity. Page 116 CONTENTS CHAPTER IV POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE ELECTRICITY Again it must be repeated that in this universe of motion-in-equilibrium all energy equalizes itself in two equal and opposite swings of the cosmic pendulum, no matter where in the cycle those opposites of motion appear. The cosmic pendulum swings forever between positive and negative electricity, eternally transferring its constant of energy from one dimension to another, but never changing that constant. The opposing energies of the two swings, added together, make one equalized unit of the universal reproductive constant. More than this, these opposing swings are simultaneously equalized at corresponding points in each of the ten octaves. Electric action and its magnetic resisting reactive flow are simultaneous and in equilibrium at all times. Positive electricity is an endothermic, contractive force which is actively absorbing a comparatively large quantity of generative light units of heat which raises its potential, and is expelling a smaller number of them, devitalized into magnetic radio-active emanations, thus slightly lowering its potential. Negative electricity is an exothermic, expansive force which is reactively absorbing a small quantity of generative light units of heat which slightly raises its potential, and is expelling a greater number of them, devitalized into magnetic radioactive emanations, thus lowering its potential. In the term "negative electricity," the word "electricity" is used in the generic sense, as the inclusive word "man" is used to represent both sexes. Electro-positive systems are preponderantly charging systems, while electro-negative systems are preponderantly discharging systems. Charging systems are in the positive half of the octave, the tones of which are generatively dominant. These systems are forcing magnetism out, and because of this they grow more compact. They therefore grow smaller, tone by tone to the fourth tone of the octave. Their atomic volume lessens and their density increases as magnetism is squeezed out, just as a sponge lessens in volume and increases in density as water is squeezed out. Now must it be clearly understood that magnetism, expelled by electricity from within a rharging system, did not enter that system as magnetism or as negative electricity. It entered as positive electricity and became devitalized into negative electricity by nucleal absorption of its positive charge. It was then expelled from the higher inner pressure to the lower outer pressure of the system. Discharging systems are in the negative half of the octave, the generative tones of which are weakened. Weakening genero-activity results in weakening radio-activity which causes the systems to grow less compact. They, therefore, grow larger, tone by tone, from the fourth to the master tone. Their volume increases and their density decreases as magnetism is allowed to return, just as a sponge increases in volume and decreases in density as water is allowed to return. By a study of the charts, pages 17, 83, it will be seen that when magnetism returns to negative systems it does not return as negative electricity. It impacts against the inertial plane between itself and the system, is regenerated and reconverted into negative electricity after it has made its centripetal journey to the apex of its spiral orbit with ever increasing pressure, and started on its centrifugal run with lowering pressure back to the inertial plane. Page 117 Charging systems are simultaneously discharging but their positive charges become increasingly preponderant and dominant until the consequent increase of potential changes the dimensions of the system. They then appear to be another substance. Discharging systems are simultaneously charging, and their negative discharges become de- creasingly dominant until the consequent lowering of potential changes their dimensions. When they have readjusted their various dimensions, they in their turn appear to be another substance. Charging systems are preponderantly generative, male systems, while discharging systems are preponderantly radiative, female systems. Charging systems are exactly balanced by discharging systems. All systems are divided into seven tones of energy. One charging tone, and its exact mate in a discharging tone, balance as one unit constant of energy. There are four exactly equal unit constants of energy in each octave. An octave is one universal reproductive constant. Ten octaves constitute one cycle. Tone 1 + is a charging system exactly balanced in all its periodicities by tone 1 —. Likewise tone 2 + is balanced by tone 2 —, and tone 3 + by 3 —. Tone 4 is a double tone which is neither positive nor negative. It is bi-sexual. These seven tones of four unit constants make up the total universal constant of energy which is omnipresent throughout the entirety of this universe of Mind. Consider, for an example of positive charge attracting positive charge, the sun of our solar system. It is the nucleal center of this system, the point of maximum positive charge. It is therefore the high potential point of the system. Consider this planet. It is a doubly charged mass, which means that it is both positive and negative. Its preponderance of positive charge is always toward the nucleal center, which means that it is always toward the light. Its preponderance of negative discharge is always away from the nucleal center, which means that it is always away from the light. The positive charge of this planet is therefore preponderant in that portion which is in daylight and the negative discharge is preponderant in that portion which is night. The daylight portion of the planet is generative and endothermic, which means active, contractive and heat absorbing. The daylight portion is that in which the potential is increasing, where flowers open their petals and relive, where life is regenerative and wide awake. The dark portion of the planet is radiative and exothermic, which means inactive, expansive and heat expelling. The dark portion is that in which the potential is lowering, where flowers close their petals and become dormant, where life is devitalized and fast asleep. Just so with all of the other planets. The positive charge moves around them as they revolve, ever keeping as near as possible to their positive nucleus, the sun. It is a well known fact that high potential discharges into lower potential. Consider the radiative rays of the sun as negative light units expelled by positive contraction, which forces them to seek lower pressures and lower potential. Page 118 Page 119 It might be argued that these negative rays are attracted by the positive charge of the daylight portion of the planet. Consider the law of pressures as stated elsewhere which says that between any two masses is a line or plane of equalized pressures. As the light units which constitute the rays circle spirally and centrifugally around the sun in their search for lower pressures exactly as this mass of light units which is our planet circles around the sun, they continue to expand and become increasingly negative the farther they recede from the sun. It must be interpolated right here that "light rays" do not proceed directly from the sun to a planet in straight lines. They follow the orbital lines of lowering pressures exactly as does this planet. All direction is curved and every curve is a part of an orbit. When the light units which we familiarly term "light rays," reach the inertial plane of equalized pressures between the mass of the sun and the mass of this planet, their expanded masses impact against it and continue beyond it in an ever increasing state of solidity. These expanded, negative particles which have reproduced themselves in transit then become positively charged as they impact with, and plunge gravitatively through the pressures which increasingly rise as they near the mass of this planet. Eventually they impact against the planet as positive charge attracted toward greater positive charge. The potential of each is increased by this impact and the heat generated by magnetic resistence to the impact is absorbed as accumulated energy until it becomes devitalized and is released by the turn of the planet away from the light. For another example, consider the familiar lightning flash which we know as "forked lightning." Lightning is a highly generative, positive charge seeking its own pressure and potential. The maximum positively charged high potential and high pressure of this planet is that part which is nearest its center. Lightning and all the forks of lightning are gravitative. They always seek the planet. Never do they proceed in the opposite direction toward negative discharge except in rare instances where a minor charge leaps upward toward a cloud of higher positive charge, or higher potential. This latter effect is exactly analogous to that of an iron nail leaping upward toward a magnet. Lightning seeking its own potential and an apple falling to the ground are effects of exactly the same cause. Gravitation is the cause of each. Each is taking a "short cut across lots," through intervening pressures, to find its equal pressure. Later it will be seen that the cause of rotation and revolution, together with all of their respective variations and periodicities, can only be solved through the understanding that positive charge attracts positive charge, and negative discharge repels both positive charge and negative discharge. Page 120 CONTENTS CHAPTER V THE ELEMENTS OF MATTER The elements of matter are but varying aggregations of corpuscular light units gathered together in systems familiarly known as atoms. Atomic systems differ from solar and stellar systems solely in dimension. In substance, structure and appearance they are exactly similar. It has heretofore been stated that all effects of motion are repeative. Mass is an effect of motion and mass is repeative, with no change whatsoever in its repetition save dimension. A "bigger" atom such as a solar system is not different from an elemental atom of the same tone in any way but size. Dimension is purely relative. The law for little mass is the same law as for big mass. The elements are supposed to be many different substances, each of which is known by a different name. Each element is supposed to be that one substance and only that. An atom of mercury or sodium is supposed to be an atom of mercury or sodium which always has been and always will be that and nothing else. The very foundation stone of modern physics states unequivocally, in its explanation of the principles of energy conservation: "Not one particle of matter, however small, may be created or destroyed. All the king's horses and all the king's men cannot destroy a pin head." Matter constantly progresses through the cycle of disappearance and reappearance. Every Pulsation of thinking Mind brings particles into appearance and relegates others into disappearance. Matter is evolving and devolving as all other forms of life are evolving and devolving. A sodium particle is not always a sodium particle. It changes its dimensions in an orderly and periodic manner until it has run the gamut of all the elements of every octave, and returned to its own octave. A radium particle was once a light unit of hydrogen and will be so again. More than this, an atom of any element actually contains within itself all .of the other elements. An atom of gold is a gold atom in dimension only. It is not even preponderantly of the substance of gold. It is everything else in the universe. Everything that is, is of everything else that is. Nothing is of itself alone. Consider for a moment an atom of manganese or an atom of iron, both of which are very similar in structure. Instead of thinking of it as an inconceivable little thing, for the purpose of comparison imagine it magnified until it is as big as this solar system. Page 121 One would not think of this vast solar system as an atom of any one of the elements, for one knows that all of the elements are contained within it. Yet this solar system is either a manganese or an iron atom. As nearly as the relator can determine without precise mathematical computation and while awaiting calculation of other dimensions it is one or the other of these elements. Its plane and extension of ecliptic, its color as a tonal system, its tonal syllable in the octave scale, its endothermic relativity as a charging system, its tonal density, temperature and other dimensions, place it within a practical certainty as one of these two elements. Later, when calculations have been made in accordance with the relater's formula, the relative age of this system, its exact tonal orbit, its potential position, plane, ecliptic expansion and extension will be exactly known. This first volume will not, however, be encumbered with mathematics. The basic principles of motion under which the One living Being functions in His thinking are simple, and simply must they be written down. The day of the mathematician will come in the adaptation of those principles. This solar system, being just one huge atom of iron or manganese, let us say, and to our knowledge containing all of the elements of the entire ten octave cycle in their proper proportions, can it not now be clearly seen that the concept of the elements as separate and distinct substances of exact homogeneity throughout their structures, is untenable in this universe of repeativeness in all of its effects of motion? Cannot it then be seen that it is not the substance itself which determines its effect as an element but merely its position, and its dimensions, in its octave constant? Cannot it also be clearly seen that the substance of the element for which it has been named is not even preponderant in its own element? This solar system, which is true to plane as iron or manganese, is not preponderantly iron or manganese in its composition. It could not be. It contains vastly larger proportions of many of the other elements and yet some cosmic giant might gather up a handful of such systems as ours, which to him would be a solid, and analyze them in his laboratory as iron or manganese atoms. Therefore let old concepts of many separate substances be discarded and replaced with the true concept of but the One universal substance of many apparent dimensions, known to man in the language of inner thinking, the language of light. There is but One cosmic substance. This One substance appears to be divided into many substances, known as the elements of matter. The One universal substance first divides itself into the appearance of two opposite states of motion which register as positive and negative elements. Then two more opposite elements appear. Then two more opposite elements of increasing potential and harder crystallization appear. The cosmic pendulum then forms one element which registers itself as neither one opposite nor the other but is equally of each, a bisexual element of maximum opposition in all periodicities of motion. These seven apparently different substances are but different states of motion of the One substance. They are the seven tones of an octave, and there are ten octaves of seven tones each. In the last four octaves are many mid-tones, each one registering its own state of motion. Man calls those various states of motion of the one substance by many names, and they appear to be many substances. Page 122 Page 123 The apparent difference between the many is due solely to difference of motion and not to substance. Many states of motion are possible, but there are not two substances in the universe. All states of motion are measurable and are under the absolute control of Mind. As man is Mind, Man can, with dawning knowledge of causes, change any one state of motion into any other state of motion, and by so doing transmute any one substance into any other. The granite rock may become gold, or radium, at the will of man. Page 124 CONTENTS CHAPTER VI THE TEN OCTAVE CYCLE OF THE ELEMENTS OF MATTER The ten octave cycle begins and ends with an absolute equalization of all dimensions of motion. Its beginning is its ending. Creation is continuous. There is no beginning and no ending. The entire ten octave cycle is merely an orderly and periodic interchange of dimensions. At the beginning of the cycle, time dimension which is then preponderant, transfers its state of motion into power dimension, which in its turn becomes preponderant, until it is overtaken by time dimension. High power is accumulated time. The elements of matter are the accumulation of the speed dimension of the universal constant of energy into power dimension. The effort of electricity to accumulate power at the expense of time is continuous but spasmodic throughout each tone in the ten octave cycle. There are ten successive efforts, hence the ten octaves. Each octave is a separate and complete sequence of inhalation and exhalation, and the entire ten octave cycle is one inconceivably extended inhalation followed by a similar exhalation. Each octave is a separate effort for supremacy made by the two opposing forces. During the first five octaves the power dimension of the universal constant gradually conquers one time dimension, by a decrease of radio-active emanations in proportion to the increase of endothermic, genero-active power of-charging by absorption, or accumulation of potential. Carbon, in the fifth octave, 504 , is the endothermic dividing line of the cycle. It is the point where the cosmic billion year inhalation of the cycle gives place to an equally majestic exhalation of another eternity in duration. Carbon is the point of maximum orbital velocity which creates the illusion of hardness. It is the point of maximum integration, highest melting point, most perfect in cubical crystallization, most compact in crystallization and most truly bi-sexual of all the elements. From carbon to the end of the cycle there is a gradual conquest of power by the other time dimension and an increase in radio-active emanations in proportion to the increase of the exothermic power of discharging accumulated potential. The law of the expression of energy in motion for the entire ten octave cycle is the same as the law for one octave, or for one tone, or for even one inhalative-exhalative pulsation. Each octave is an endothermic, heat absorbing, contractive, generative series of electric actions, followed by an exothermic heat emanating, expansive, radio-active series of magnetic reactions. Each of these series of actions and reactions is of the others. More than this, each is of the others, both simultaneously and alternately. The first five octaves are therefore male, or electro-positive, in preponderance and the second five octaves are female, or electro-negative, in preponderance. The law of repeativeness in all effects of motion is illustrated by the comparison of the cycle of the elements to the life and growth of man. Page 125 The first five octaves may be likened unto the birth, childhood, youth and growing strength of that evolving idea of Mind called man. Page 126 The last five octaves are the decline into apparent dissolution of the idea of man into that state called "death," at which point the state called "life" once more begins. Every idea of Mind evolves and devolves by the same formula as that of the locked potentials of the ten octaves of integrating and disintegrating matter. This is the law of growth. This is the orderly periodicity of those phenomena of nature which are called "life" and "death," and are spoken of as though they were two separate things, instead of one unit composed of a plus action and a minus reaction of an orderly and inevitable periodicity. "Life" is merely an expression of the generative power of centripetal force, to which "death" is but the degenerative reaction. The beginning of the cycle of motion is maximum in one time dimension, which means speed, and minimum in its power dimension, which means potential of energy. "Speed" means the quickness with which a state of motion can reproduce itself and, by so doing, communicate that state of motion to the entire universe. Potential of energy means that state of motion of the universal constant of energy in which time dimension has been accumulated, by deceleration of speed, into power. Potential of energy might be likened unto a compressed spring which, when released, leaps to its inert state. All of the elements of matter are potentials of energy held in their respective locked positions by the varying dimensions of their respective positions in their octaves. In order to picture the gradual and orderly transfer of time dimension to power and visibility, and its return to time dimension and invisibility, consider the simple analogy of the easily imagined constant of energy of the little mountain brook which flows steadily and swiftly down the mountain side. Imagine the little stream of low potential falling swiftly over the cliff side into a reservoir where it is accumulating high potential by storing time. The little stream is the only source of supply and is presumably constant. The variation of its ability to perform more or less work is in accord with the amount of time dimension which has been transformed into power by the storage of time.
