---
MANDATORY READING: You HAVE TO read TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md first, then this file.
Cross-reference: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell_index.md
Related files: []
Chapter: 3 of 15
Last updated: 2025-06-02 22:21:06
---

# Chapter 3

**Extracted from PDF**: TheUniversalOne1926WalterRussell.pdf
**Chunk**: 3 of 15
**Words**: ~7,416
**Quality Score**: 0.00
**Extraction Strategy**: auto

---

That which is true of chemical unions is true of all species of organic life. Every chemist knows to a certainty that he can break up any unstable compound formed by the union of unequal opposites, by merely introducing an element which is more nearly a true tonal mate to either of the united elements. Consider, for example, a chemical union between the male action sodium (Na), which is 601 -I- of the sixth octave, with selenium (Se), which is 702 — of the next octave, an unequally opposite female. The introduction of iodine (I), 801 — of the eighth octave, will cause sodium to leave selenium and combine with iodine to form the more stable compound sodium-iodide (Nal). Introduce bromide (Br), 701— of the seventh octave, and sodium will in turn leave iodine to form sodium-bromide (NaBr), a still more stable compound. Finally, introduce chlorine (Cl) which is the true mate, 601— of the sixth octave, and sodium will leave the bromine in order to form the very stable compound, sodium-chloride (NaCI). No element of any octave whatsoever can displace chlorine from its union with sodium. Chemically, every element is both alkaline and acid, but it is preponderantly one or the other. All male electro-positive elements are preponderantly alkaline. All female elements are preponderantly acid. The alkaline male actions, when united with equal and opposite acid female reactions, are neutralized. They become salts. Alkaline male actions united with unequal acid female reactions, accentuate the acidity or alkalinity. Hydrogen united with its true mate helionon, becomes a neutral salt. Hydrogen and fluorine will unite as an acid. Hydrogen and chlorine will unite as a stronger acid. All acids or alkalies increase in their strength as their resentment of unequal union increases. Likewise, the ability to reproduce decreases as the acidity or alkalinity of such unions increases. Page 51 Chemical elements in union reproduce by the same process by which all other states of motion reproduce. Of this more will be written when further consideration of causes make the effects of those causes more comprehensible. All male actions are centripetal and all female reactions are centrifugal. Variance of centripetal or centrifugal force is variation of potential. Union and reproduction are always governed by sex periodicity in electro-magnetic charge, the order of which will be written down and charted. Consider, for example, the reproduction of the sound of the human voice echoing in the hills. Sound, like all other forms of energy, is an accumulated potential. Release this high potential and it immediately expands. Expansion is radiation. Radiation is discharge of accumulated potential. As the sound of the voice, as accumulated potential, radiates into the silence of higher octaves of lower potential, and impacts against the closely integrated high potential of the cliff side, the degenerative discharge is reversed and becomes generative charge. Expanding lowering potential is reversed to contracting higher potential. In other words, the sex opposites in the radiating sound waves are forced into closer contact by the impact, so that the wave dimensions which originally produced the sound are restored. The counterpart of the sound as cause has been produced as a reproduced effect of that cause. It is not the same sound, it is another sound. It is a reproduced counterpart, a regenerated reincarnation of the state of motion which originally produced the sound. That which is true of regeneration by echo is also true of reproduction by radio or any other similar process. All are but the reversal of radiation into regeneration by impact against the inertial planes of higher potentials. Generation or re-generation is an effect of gravitation. An impact of radiative energy against any lower octave of integration will set up the necessary resistance to the radiative energy to regenerate it into its original form. Page 52 CONTENTS CHAPTER XI ENERGY TRANSMISSION Some old misconcepts must now be corrected by a brief statement of principles, the full ex- planations of which will be given in their proper order. That light travels, energy is transmitted, electricity is conducted or inducted, and that heat radiates from its source to other localities, are principles which modern science accepts as fundamental facts. These great misconcepts gave rise to the theory that the ether is a quivering, elastic solid existing in space along the undulating waves of which light, heat and all forms of energy can travel from one place to another. It is hereby conceded that all motion is expressed in waves, but those waves are not undulating. Energy cannot travel along waves because entire waves do not form in sequence. In other words, one whole wave is not completed before another begins. Waves are but effects which evolve as their cause evolves. Waves reproduce themselves part for part in sequence throughout the universe. Energy, therefore, cannot travel along waves which are not undulating but are reproducing themselves part for part. It cannot leap across waves which are lacking in troughs and crests. Light does not travel. It reproduces itself. The light and heat which appear to come from the star or the sun has never left the star or the sun. That which man sees as light and feels as heat is the reproduced counterpart of the light and of the heat which is its cause. The cause remains in the restricted area of the state of motion where it began its existence as an appearance, until it expands into disappearance. That which man sees as a star is not a vision, a picture, an image or a reflection of the star. It is the exact reproduced chemical counterpart of the star integrated as light within the observer. That which is true of the star is true of the image of the mountain, or the brook or the meadow violet. No idea of Mind is seen at a distance. The state of motion which represents the idea is reproduced as light by regenerative impact within the observer. No idea of Mind has place or position in time or space. All idea is universal. All generated states of motion degenerate by expansion. Expanding states of motion regenerate by impact against the inertial planes of higher potential. Man has a higher potential than his surrounding atmosphere. Any object "seen" by man is a generated potential which is higher than the expanded potential which intervenes between the object and the observer. The higher potential of the object discharges into the lower surrounding potential as the reproduced expanded counterpart of its particular state of motion, and recharges within the observer. This reproducing expanding counterpart impacts against the inertial plane of equal pressures which exists somewhere between the object and the observer. This impact causes a reversal of the process of reproduction of an expanding counterpart, into reproduction of a contracting counterpart. The expansion of a state of motion is degeneration. Page 53 The recontraction of expanding states of motion is regeneration. The law of reproducing idea is the principle of universality. All that is, is of everything else that is. The principle of reproduction is the principle of energy transmission. Energy transmission is conductive and inductive. Conduction is the lowering of high potential toward inertia. Induction is the raising of a low potential away from inertia. The electronegative, dissipative, reaction impulse of energy transmission is conduction. The electropositive, generative, action impulse of energy transmission is induction. Conductive energy resists the completion of the wave. Inductive energy ever leaps ahead in its eagerness to complete the wave. Conductive energy ever pulls toward inertia through the harmonic of the wave. Inductive energy ever pulls toward the overtones of the waves, which are the points of maximum opposition. A state of equilibrium is the state of inertia which exists where pressures of two opposing high potentials of accumulated energy are equalized. Form of idea is a state of potential which is held together as form by the genero-active law of gravitation until it is torn apart by the radioactive law of radiation. All potential is constantly changing and interchanging. The potentials of all things are constantly rising because of their absorption of the discharged energy of all other states of motion. All mass is regenerated by absorption of the impacting radio-active energy of all other mass. Also are all potentials constantly lowering because of their expanded reproduction in the surrounding lower potentials. All mass is degenerated by its own radiation. All mass is generated by accumulation of the universal constant of energy into higher potential. That which is generated must be radiated. All mass is degenerated by release of energy accumulation. Consider, for example, the regeneration of this planet by the radiation of the sun's high potential of energy impacting against its surface. Modern science presumes that heat travels in some mysterious manner across the vast ninety million miles of space between the sun and the earth, crossing that space in which a temperature of nearly absolute zero prevails, and then arriving here hot. Man feels warmth from the sun and in some manner it must be accounted for. The theory arrived at is far from the truth. Somewhere in the intervening low potential: between the sun and the earth is the inertia. plane where the pressures of the potentials of the sun and earth are equalized. Against this inertial plane the sun's cooling and expanding radiation impacts and reverse: its expansion into contraction. The cooling, expanding, lowering potential reverses into heating, contracting, rising p& tential. By this impact the expanding radioactive energy is reversed into contracting, generoactive energy. By the impact of the sun's regenerated light emanations against this planet, all disintegrating matter is regenerated. Page 54 Every living thing reverses its nightly intent to die and lives again. Flowers which have folded their petals reopen them and grow. Animal life which has closed its eyes in "sleep" becomes "conscious" once more and takes on new energy. The modern concept that solar energy is due to contraction is a misconcept. The energy given off from the sun is energy that is being generated within the sun. No energy can be radiated that has not been, or is not being generated. All radiating mass is generating. All opposite effects of motion are simultaneous in their expression. The sun is preponderantly generative. It is heating. The sun is in a lesser degree radiative. It is cooling. As the sun heats, it radiates. Radiation disintegrates. As the sun cools, it generates. Generation integrates. Here follows the law of the cycle of appearance and disappearance of form. Cold generates. Generation contracts. Contraction integrates. Integration heats. Heat raddiates. Radiation expands. Expansion disintegrates. Disintegration cools. Thus it may be seen that one opposite is always born of the other, which in its turn becomes the cause of the first. Thus it may be seen that the disintegration of the preponderantly generating sun becomes the regeneration of this planet. The coefficient of cold for an expanded volume of mass of low pressure and potential becomes the coefficient of heat for the same mass in a contracted volume of higher pressure and higher potential. The totals of heat and potential have not changed. They have merely changed their dimensions. Nor has heat travelled. It has becn reproduced. Magnetic flow in its magnetic orbit has been interrupted, that is all. The voice impacting against the cliff is an exact analogy. The voice regenerates into sound and the positive charge of the cliff increases because of the impact. The heat from the sun has been disintegrated by radiation into the opposite of heat, which is cold. In radiation, however, the heat energy is not lost. Nothing can be lost. The energy which generated that heat is registered, together with the energy which radiated it, in an expanded counterpart of them both. No idea of Mind, once begun, ever ends. No idea of Mind ever began or ever ended. Page 55 Page 56 CONTENTS CHAPTER XII THIS IS A FINITE UNIVERSE Mind is all there is. It has no limitations as to shape, size or volume, for these qualities are but appearances and have no real existence. Mind is limited, however, in its power, its knowledge and its imagination, the last of which is its creative force. All of the effects, of which Mind is the cause, are measurable in that they have the appearance of dimension. All dimension is limited, therefore must all cause be limited. Mind cannot create infinite complexity. Beyond the ten octave cycle of cause and its included effects, Mind cannot go. All effects evolve to their limit, and devolve back again into cause without any change whatsoever taking place in cause. The limitations of Mind are absolute. A limited universe cannot be an infinite universe. This concept is extremely difficult for man to comprehend, for man has a fixed concept of a non- existent effect called "space." This mis-concept is born of his fixed idea of a universe separable into parts, all of which are related one to another in shape, size, volume and the intervals of distance between them. To man, space and distance are fixed attributes of all his concepts and limit his comprehension. Man has built a mis-concept of an infinite universe of infinite extension. Based upon his mis-concept of space he has reasoned that the universe cannot be finite or limited in extent for, if so, it must have shape or form. Also, he has reasoned that, in order for it to have shape, or form, and be limited and finite, there must be something beyond. The objective universe of man's concept demands a "beyond" to a finite universe. But there is no "beyond" because there are no bounds nor boundaries in this formless universe. If space is non-existent then extension or continuity is non-existent, and there can be no "beyond." "Beyond" is a relative word. It is part of man's concept of objective relativity. It is a dimension. It is based on a belief in the reality of the unrealities of dimension and separableness in a universe of the One Thing. Man's sense of reasoning does not accept the idea of the universe as a finite volume, such as a sphere, hanging in a vacuum, beyond which, to his objective thinking, there must be more empty space. For this reason he has formulated the belief that a finite universe is inconceivable to the, human mind, therefore the universe must be infinite. Man's outer mind reasoning, which is objective, does not stop to consider that an infinite universe is more inconceivable to the human mind than a finite one; but that same reasoning is willing to accept the palpably incomprehensible and relegate it to the domain of divinity, which is admittedly incompre- hensible, rather than concentrate the inner Mind upon the higher octaves of thinking and learn the truth in light. Page 57 Einstein rightly says that the universe is finite, but wrongly says that it has form. This great thinker declares his belief that the universe is spherical or elliptical. Einstein rightly says that any line of direction in that appearance which man calls space is curved and that it is presumable that any continuous line in space would curve ultimately back to its point of beginning, therefore the universe must be either spherical or quasi-spherical. This curving, however, is not because the One substance of Mind has a finite form or shape, but because all effects of motion are universal, and every effect of motion is an action which must end where it began, in its final reaction. Direction, therefore, can never be in a straight line but must always be curved. The reason why all lines must be curved lines, and also why all curved lines must be spiral in their curvature, will be written down in all exactness in its proper place. It is true that any apparent disturbance in the substance of Mind returns unto itself, unto its own exact apparent point of beginning in a sequence of reproduced waves which spell out the appearance of another non-existent effect called "time." Man's fixed concept of the reality of time is a drag anchor holding him away from truth. His fixed concept of intervals of time in which one effect of motion in one "part" of the universe makes its appearance in another "part" is the result of such purely objective thinking that true concepts cannot replace them as long as this method of thinking persists. There are no "parts" to Mind substance, no "place" and no "position." Every part is the same part, every place and position the same place and position. Thinking is universal and all effects of thinking are universal. More than this, they are simultaneously universal, for thinking is simultaneously universal. Even the little child in tossing a ball 016/CS the universe simultaneously with that tossing. All motion is simultaneously universal in this universe of equilibrium. Sequence is an appearance due to form. It has no existence in itself and without form it would not have even the appearance of existence. All form is purely a question of gravitational intensity and therefore has no existence. Time itself is an effect of gravitation, and has no existence. Like heat, it is but an indicator which registers sequence in integration as heat registers resistance to integration. The reproductions and effects of motion and their attendant unrealities do not in any way change the universal substance of Mind, the one reality, the one unchanging, indivisible, ultimate substance of all that is. Add to the non-existent appearances "form," space" and "time," two others which obsess man's mind, "position" and "dimension," and the relator can readily perceive that, with these non-existent unrealities firmly fixed in his mind as existent realities, it would be impossible for man to accept the idea of a finite universe. To do so he would have to imagine a form hanging like a ball in a void, to which there must be an empty inconceivable beyond. Man's outer mind is so accustomed to thinking reality into the unrealities of space, time, motion, form, position and dimension of an objective universe, that it is hard for him to adjust his thinking to a subjective universe in which the unrealities disappear into the reality of light. Man's inner Mind thinks in light, freed in its thinking from the illusions of outer mind thinking. Einstein's error is in attaching to the substance of Mind the attributes which belong solely to dimension of the substance in its appearance as form. Page 58 CONTENTS CHAPTER XIII A DIMENSIONLESS UNIVERSE Dimension is but an appearance, an effect of motion and is non-existent. A mile between apparent objects is nonexistent with the disappearance of the objects. Man's fixed concept of a universe of innumerable objects separated by relative and measurable distances unfits him for thinking of the universe in any but a relative sense. Man must think in light for true comprehension of Mind. All men may think in the higher octaves of light when they but comprehend, for with comprehension comes power. To think in light is not a new power being evolved by man like a new sense; it is a power which is already in every atom of man's composition. Man thinks in the low octaves of his own integration almost unaware that the higher octaves are within him, for the lower octaves are superimposed upon the higher. The higher octaves of incredibly higher speeds are within the lower octaves of high potential but slow speed. Man may shift his thinking from the low speed of his outer mind to the higher speeds of his inner Mind at will, even as he can shift the gears of his motor car. Man's thinking in his low octaves of bodily integration is like a man running his motor on low gear ignorant of the fact that he has higher gears. Man's thinking in the higher octaves is like a man who is aware of higher gears in his car and knowingly uses them. Universal Mind thinks in light and registers that thinking in light which is integrated into the idea of the thinking, and suspended for a time in the lower octaves of light in the appearance of form. Man's outer mind is an integration of light in the lower octaves of that which he calls "matter" and man's outer mind thinks in the dimensions, or illusions, of Mind or matter. Matter and Mind and light and energy are the same. They are One. They are existent in that they never disappear. They are constant. They are eternal. Dimension of Mind, or light, or matter, or energy is but the illusion of the Mind substance due solely to more or less sustained motion. The substance which is Mind, or light, or matter, or energy, and is eternally existent as cause, must not be confused with its effects in motion which are but dimensions and therefore non-existent. Dimension is purely objective. Outer mind thinking is objective thinking. Objective thinking is thinking in dimension. The substance of matter is eternal but its illusions of dimension, in form, are fleeting. Matter is frozen light, crystallized light of man's own lower octaves of thinking, so, even in outer mind thinking, man thinks in light, but it is meaningless to him. Man's inner Mind is light of the high octaves of inspirational, ecstatic thinking. To man's inner vision light is always light. It never disappears. Inner Mind thinking is subjective thinking. Subjective thinking is dimensionless thinking. The inner Mind of man knows no darkness. Light knows light; and all that is, is light. Page 59 In the high speeds of inner thinking matter is dimensionless. The universe of Mind is a dimensionless universe. The universe of the idea of Mind is a universe of dimension. The creating universe is the idea of Mind. It is the divine concept of a universe of motion and the apparent separability of the One Thing into the appearance of many individual things. Page 60 CONTENTS CHAPTER XIV CONCERNING DIMENSION The divine concept of a universe of form is the idea of the image-making faculty of Mind. The divine concept is but an illusion of divine imagination. Mind thinks the ideas of Mind into an illusion of form. Dimension appears when form appears. Form appears as a result of motion generated by the concentrative impulse of thinking. Form disappears as a result of motion radiated by the deconcentrative alternate reactive impulse of thinking. Creation therefore is but an illusion due to complex states of motion. All motion is comprehensible. All motion is caused by thinking Mind. All motion is controllable by Mind. All comprehensible motion is measurable. Measures are dimensions. Dimensions are the intervals which define the relation of one illusion of form to another. Dimension disappears with the disappearance of the illusions it defines. All illusions of form are but varying states of motion locked into the separate states of potential which define those illusions. All states of motion are orderly and periodic. All states of motion, no matter how complex, are reducible to ten octaves of seven tones each, plus their mid-tones and their master-tones. All creation 4s reducible to about a hundred and forty elements which tell the entire complex story of God's thinking just as all literature is reducible to twenty-six letters which tell the entire complex story of all of man's thinking. Neither have any existence beyond their ability of expressing, in form, the manifesting idea of creative Mind. The elements of matter are all of the same substance in varying states of motion. Gold is not one substance and carbon another, and phosphorus still another. Gold differs from carbon, and silicon differs from copper, only by the relation of their intervals in motion, or the measurements of their separate dimensions which, when aggregated, constitute their separate states of motion. The divine concept is not a universe of motion, but of idea in form. Motion is necessary to produce the form of idea. It is but an attribute of thinking. It is not a principle. Man labors in the bowels of the earth for metals which he can create for himself with ease when he fully comprehends the motion which has assembled the forms of those elements out of the idea of the divine concept. All that is in creation is fashioned into the form of idea by the ten octave alphabets of thinking Mind. Knowledge of the dimensions of each state of motion will give to man the power to produce from the most plentiful of them those which are most rare. That which nature has taken millions of years to produce through orderly interchange of potentials man may produce in a few hours by forced interchange. Page 61 There is no substance which nature can produce that man cannot also produce, when he knows the dimensions which measure the illusion of form of the substance. Man has control of more energy than is necessary to transmute any one element or any compound into any other element or compound. All that he lacks is the knowledge of dimension in order that he may transmute that state of potential energy locked up in a state of motion called carbon into that other state of motion called gold; and he may have all that he desires at the cost of a very slight effort. The formula for measuring all dimensions of the various elements of matter will herein be written down and charted with all exactness so that man's burden of heavy labor may be lightened. Years will pass before civilization will have adjusted itself thoroughly to the changed conditions which this new knowledge will bring to the world, but from this change a new civilization will spring. These are the dimensions which, when known and measured will make man master in that he will be able to evolve, or devolve, or transmute, or synthesize the elements at will. The first dimension is "length." The second, "breadth." The third, "thickness." The fourth, "duration," or "time." The fifth, "sex." The sixth, "pressures." The seventh, "potentials." The eighth, "temperature." The ninth, "ionization." The tenth, "crYstallization." The eleventh, "valence." The twelfth, "axial rotation." The thirteenth, "orbital revolution." The fourteenth, "mass." The fifteenth, "color." The sixteenth, "plane." The seventeenth, "tone." The eighteenth, "ecliptic." These dimensions are characterized by one outstanding peculiarity common to all of them, an orderly periodicity. Beyond these eighteen dimensions, and their inclusions, there are no more measurable intervals of motion. When all of these periodicities are charted and their mathematical calculations computed with exactness it will be very simple for the ingenuity of man to devise the mechanical apparatus necessary to decrease any high potential into any lower one, or increase any low potential into any higher one. Acceleration and deceleration are now measurable. Temperature, tone, color, valence, ionization ---: and those pressures which are known are now measured. Mass is measurable. Known orbits are now measured and the unknown ones will be measured when they have been made known. The waves which constitute the complex of all elements have already been computed. Page 62 The spectrum has been divided and. the elements assorted into about seven thousand color lines of light; but they are as meaningless to man as the Hebrew language is to the gentile. These seven thousand lines of light are the letters of the universal language of light, the language in which God speaks to man. When man knows this language he will then think in it. When he thinks in light he will then know that he is the Son of God, that he is One with God. When man thinks in light he will then know that he is universal Mind; that he is all that is; that he is thinking Mind expressing his thinking in light; that he is omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent. He will then know that he is life and that life is eternal and that there is no death; and that he has neither place nor position in space or time; and that dimension is as though it were not; and that there is but One, and that One He, and you, and me, and the rolling hills and the sands of the sea, and the clouds and stars and the little violet blooming in the meadow. Already man has gone a far way toward the solving of the great secret of this creating universe which lies hidden in the elements. Within God's alphabet of light the locked secret has long awaited the master key of knowledge to open the doors to man. Man is Mind. Mind creates and controls the energies of the elements. Mind may rearrange these energies and combine them in accord with its desire. Page 63 CONTENTS CHAPTER XV THE FORMULA OF THE LOCKED POTENTIALS Now must be constructed the cosmic clock by means of which all dimensions may be measured by one formula, as time is measured by the formula of hours, minutes and :seconds. Heretofore it has been written down that periodicity is an absolute characteristic of all effects of motion. With two exceptions, all dimensions of all effects of motion are of the same orderly octave periodicity. These two exceptions are of cyclic periodicity. Octave periodicity is an orderly progression to and from the maximum effect of each octave. Cyclic periodicity is an orderly progression to and from the maximum effect of the entire cycle. Thus may it now be simply stated that all periodicities of all motion of whatever nature, with two exceptions, may be built up on the following extremely simple formula: The two exceptions to this octave periodicity are mass, and tone. Mass means weight. Tone means sound. Mass accumulates all down the entire ten octaves; tone lowers fromthe highest note down the cosmic keyboard to the lowest. The zero represents inertial energy, and the numerals represent the orderly progressions in locked potentials and pressures and orbits. Thinking Mind has devised these orderly progressions as its method of evolving the idea of universal thinking into the appearance of form, and devolving it into the disappearance of form. The numerals of this formula are the hours of the cosmic clock. They are in the relative positions of the atoms of the elements and in the order of their respective varying dimensions. The seconds of the cosmic clock are the corpuscles, or light units which make up the atom's structures. The hands of the clock are the indicating line of charging and discharging potential. The main-spring is the ten octave cycle. Five of these octaves are decelerating time dimension transformed, by accumulation, into power, and the other five octaves are power dimension released into accelerating time. The winding of the clock is the sublime five octave inhalation, and its unwinding is its five octave exhalation. The cosmic pendulum in its swinging ticks off the varying dimensions of all motion forever and forever with unfailing accuracy, but never does it depart from this simple formula. One by one the relator will take up and analyze the eighteen dimensions of the effects of motion. Page 64 Neither temperature, nor valence, nor orbit, nor color, nor ionization, nor electric force, nor magnetic force, nor any effect of chemistry known to man or still to become known, none of these, nor others herein unnamed, excepting mass and tone, can extend beyond this simple formula. It is meet that this simple formula of vast import should have a name so that it may be referred to in proper terminology. "The formula of locked potentials" shall be the name by which this formula shall be hereafter known. Page 65 Page 66 CONTENTS CHAPTER XVI UNIVERSAL ONE-NESS Now must the simplest but the greatest of all laws of the universe be written down. Everything that is, is of everything else that is. Nothing is of itself alone. All created things are indissolubly united. This is the law of the entire substance of divine Mind. This is the law of the souls of things. This is the law of love. It is the law of the One-ness of the universe. All that is, is One. There are not two independently separate things in the entire universe. Individuality is non-existent. Individuality is but an appearance of separability and divisibility in a universe which is non- separable and non-divisible. No one can say "I alone am I." If one should say, "I am I;" he must say also to all men and all created things "I am thou," and "Thou art also I." The One-ness of the universe is the sublimely simple One spiritual substance of divine Mind. The One substance of Mind is a living substance of the One living thinking Being of which all things in this universe are a part, and to which they are indissolubly united. Light is that which makes of the One substance a living substance. Light is the life principle of Mind. Light is the creating force of the universe. Light is all that is. Light is the living God. God is manifested in light. Light is the Holy Spirit, God, father-mother, nature, man, the oak, the rolling hills and mountain chains, the pounding sea and the sands of the sea, the babbling brook, the red apple hanging on the tree; the autumn haze, the storm, the stars in the heavens, the blade of grass and the kindly dew in the opening rose. All creating things are dependent upon light to hold them together in the appearance of individually separate things. As light is the substance of all things, and all things are dependent on light, all things are therefore inter-dependent. All are continuously interchanging by reproduction throughout the universe in continuity. No one created thing has time, nor place, nor position in idea. The idea of all creating things is universal. It is omnipresent as idea throughout the entirety of Mind but the counterpart of idea in all created things is sequential in time and place. The counterpart of idea is the reproduced idea. The reproduced idea is a part of the basic idea. This is a universe of reproduction. Page 67 Page 68 Page 69 Production and reproduction of idea of thinking Mind is the sole result of thinking, and the sole reason for thinking. Idea and reproduction of idea are universal in sequence as states of motion are universal in sequence. Idea and reproduction of idea are multiplied as appearances in motion-in-opposition of which the pulsations of thinking Mind are the cause. There is no other cause. There is no other motion. Each idea and each reproduced counterpart of idea has but the appearance of time and place and position from which it does not appear to depart; still is it of all the universe a part. The rose blooming in my garden is of Arcturus a part as it is of you and me. The universe sways to the swaying of the rose in my garden. Every particle of matter in this universe has its own magnetic pole through which it is connected with the magnetic pole of each other particle of matter in the universe and through which each particle is affected by the ever-changing condition of every other particle in the universe. This is a universe of equilibrium in motion, the continuity of which could not be maintained except through the inter-dependence of all apparently separated units. Everything that is, is of everything else that is. Nothing is of itself alone. All created things arc indissolubly united. All is God and God is all. God is light; light is all. Creation is the sublime idea of the sublime Being. The sublime is always simple. With creation simplicity seems to end and complexity to begin. Complexity belongs to creating things. Man's outer mind is a heavy and complex mind. It knows not the sublimity of simplicity. The inner Mind of man is attuned to the ecstatic meter of divine thinking. The inner Mind of man knows the sublimity of deific simplicity. The inner Mind of man knows light. Everything that is, is of everything else that is. Nothing is of itself alone. The perfume of the rose is part of the rose and it is also a part of man, and of the winds, and of the garden wall. The perfume of the rose is light as the rose is light, and so also is man, and the winds, and the garden wall.. All that is, is light. Nothing is of itself alone. He who knows this greatest of all laws knows love. Love is a realization of the Oneness of the universe. Love is the ecstasy of inspired thinking. God's thinking is ecstatic thinking. God is love. Until man knows from within his inner Mind this law of the Oneness of all things, it has no meaning for him. When man knows this law in his heart he will have no limitations. When man knows this law so that its reaction within the soul of man is that of ecstatic, inspired contemplation, he will then begin to know the meaning of love. Unlimited power will then be his. Page 70 His thinking will then be true thinking. All power is in true thinking. "Thinking true" may be likened unto a violin string sounded by the great master. Ten thousand other strings tuned to the same pitch would sing in unison, unplayed upon. Ten thousand other strings not so attuned would not know the ecstasy. They would be as though they were not. Inspired thinking is thinking in tune with divinity Inspired thinking is thinking in exact pitch with the high octaves of divine thinking. The rhythm of light, in the high octaves of light, is the measure of true pitch and true thinking. True thinking of the inner Mind makes true thinking of the outer mind. The outer mind thinks not in ecstatic measure. As a man thinks in his inner Mind, so is he. The inner Mind within all men and within all things is divine Mind. The inner Mind of man is tuned to the higher speeds of ecstatic thinking. Man may know the ecstasy of his own divine thinking, if he will but tune his thinking to the high speeds or ecstatic meter of divine Mind, which is within all men and all things. When man will so attune his thinking, then will he think in light. The inner Mind of man alone can think in light. Inner thinking is ecstatic thinking. The outer mind of man cannot know light. The outer mind cannot know ecstasy. When man thinks in light he will then knot the perfection of divine idea. He will b universal genius. Imperfection of idea cannot exist. The entire idea of thinking Mind is good. There is no evil. There is no imperfection That which man calls the "created universe' is the idea of thinking Mind. The idea of Mind is perfect, as Mind in it self is perfect. Perfection of idea is truth. Imperfection of idea is electro-magnetically impossible in this universe of equilibrium as we shall see in later chapters of this book. Thinking true, in light, will give to man all-power. He will have no limitations except those that are universal. With his feet on the electrodes of the universe and his eyes in the high heavens, impossibilities of yesterday will be simple achievements of today. With this knowledge from within, man can have dominion over all nature and all things. Man can have dominion over his own body and command it to health and to beauty and to comeliness. With a realization of this law in his heart he will love and be loved of all men and all creating things. And he will know all things. All knowledge will come to man when he knows this law in his heart. All knowledge exists. Thinking man has all knowledge. Inspired man knows the law of love in his heart with the One-ness of the universe. All knowledge is existent in the universe and is the inheritance of thinking man from divine Mind, God and Father of man and of all creating things. This inheritance of all-knowing awaits every man to use as and when he desires that knowledge. Page 71 CONTENTS CHAPTER XVII OMNIPRESENCE Man's concept of God as omnipresent, or universally present, is an inconsistent concept, for it does not include man or nature in that concept as God, or as part of God. Man has been so trained to look for God outside the realms of nature, as an incomprehensible, substanceless God, separate and apart from himself and from that which he knows as the physical universe, that it has become a tradition of his thinking, a fixed habit of his thinking. It may be a shock therefore to the outer mind of man to find a comprehensible God, of which he himself and all phenomena of nature are One. If this discovery shocks man's earth-bound mind, then he must learn to readjust his thinking, for there is no other God than Mind. And there is no other Mind than the One universal Mind. Nor is there any other purpose for Mind than the purpose of thinking. Man cannot conceive any other purpose for Mind than that of thinking. Nor is there any other product of thinking than idea. Creation is but an idea of thinking Mind. The divine concept, materialized into this universe of matter, is a stupendous idea of Mind but it varies not one bit in principle from the simplest idea of man. Nor does it vary in universal mechanics from the dynamic principles employed by man for the materialization of his ideas. God is Mind. Man is Mind. All idea of God or man is but the product of thinking Mind, registered in matter as form of idea. All idea is an illusion of Mind and visible only to Mind as an illusion. Idea is held in form by Mind for countless periodic intervals of evolution and dissolution. All thinking is universal thinking, immortal thinking. There is no mortal thinking. All idea of Mind is perfect. Imperfection of Mind cannot exist. Separation of Mind into parts is impossible, therefore there are not two Minds or two substances. The One substance of Mind is light. Light is universal. Man is light and man is universal. That which is universal is omnipresent. Man, is, therefore, omnipresent. All matter is omnipresent. The universe has no extension, continuity, space nor time. The One-ness of the universe allows no exceptions, no mistakes, no error in its all inclusiveness. Nothing is omitted from the entirety of Mind. There are no separable parts to Mind. No apparent part of Mind has locality Or position. All matter is universally present. All matter is light. Mind is light. Mind is the universe. Mind is all. ONE. Page 72 CONTENTS CHAPTER XVIII OMNIPOTENCE Omnipotence means all the power that exists. The omnipotence of the universe is limited in its expression by the limited power of the universal constant of energy to accumulate potential. The dynamic energy born of the action and reaction of universal thinking is the beginning of the activity of that which man calls "electricity" and "magnetism" through which the universal constant of energy functions in the creation of separate appearances in matter by periodic changes of dimension. It is the beginning of apparent division of indivisible things into their apparent opposites. It is the beginning of sex. Sex begins when the opposites of light begin. It is the beginning of that which man knows as light and of the colors of light. It is the beginning of life. Life begins when light begins. It is the beginning of sound. Sound begins when light begins. It is the beginning of the generative concentration of light into that state which man calls "heat" and its radiation into that which man calls "cold." It is the beginning of integration and disintegration of light energy into the appearance and disappearance of that which man calls "matter." It is the beginning of the crystallization of light units into that which man calls solids of matter. It is the beginning of integration and disintegration of light energy into the appearance and disappearance of that which man calls "mass." It is the beginning of the electro-magnetic opposition of the two forces which accumulate and dissipate the universal constant of energy into the periodicities of gravitation, attraction, cohesion, radiation and-repulsion of evolving and devolving mass.
